 It is always a pleasure to come home to San Francisco, and it is a special pleasure to speak in this distinguished forum, the Commonwealth Club, where so many leaders have addressed topics of great concern to the nation and the world.
I speak today, appropriately, of one element of our “common wealth” – the cultural heritage we share. I speak, in particular, of the contibution of our nation’s colleges and universities to the preservation and augmentation of that common wealth.
I speak at a time when the value of that contribution is questioned by many of our citizens. Some worry – anxiously and very publicly – that our finest schools undermine, rather than preserve, our cultural heritage. And even those who understand and admire the accomplishments of our universities are concerned that higher education may be a luxury that we cannot afford.
What leads me to say that the public questions the mission and performance of our universities? Unable to break the habit formed during my professional training as an economist, I look first at the numbers. Presumably, in a democracy, we can draw inferences about the public’s will from the pattern of public expenditures. On this hypothesis, we can learn something from the data on the Federal government’s support for universities.
Consider the government’s support for students. In mid-1970s, the average Federal grant awarded to qualified undergraduates around the country reached its highest point in inflation-adjusted dollars; it has declined more or less steadily since then. In 1978, the Federal government contributed 25 cents of every dollar of grant aid awarded by Yale College. Today, the government contributes only six cents of every dollar. At a few well-endowed private schools like Yale, where a commitment to fund the full financial need of all admitted students survives, the shortfall in grant aid is covered by the institution’s own resources. For most college students around the country, however, the reduced availability of Federal grants has led to increased dependence on student loans. To make matters worse, the Congress now threatens to eliminate the long-standing policy of forgiving interest on Federal loans during the period a student is still enrolled in school. Elimination of this in-school interest subsidy will raise the ultimate debt burden facing many of our college graduates by 25 to 60 percent.
Consider also public support for university-based scientific research. Although aggregate funding has grown at about 5% per year since 1978, a closer look reveals two indications of diminished confidence in our universities. First, there has been some movement away from support for the type of basic or fundamental scientific investigation in which universities have unique competence. This has been accompanied by increased emphasis on research that offers greater possibilities for immediate practical or commercial application.
Second, both Congress and the Executive Branch have begun to challenge the principle that has governed national science policy since the late 1940s – that universities, subject to careful auditing and a competitive system of peer review, should recover the full cost of Federally-sponsored scientific research. Increasingly, academic institutions have been forced to rely on their own resources to support scientific research, and an increasing share of research dollars have been allocated through pork-barrel politics instead of competition on the merits.
Where else do we find evidence of public skepticism about the mission and performance of our universities? In our newspapers and news magazines, on talk shows, in letters from alumni, in the halls of Congress, even in some of our most prestigious journals of opinion, we see a number of complaints repeated frequently: the cost of a college education is too high; professors don’t spend enough time teaching; universities should be doing more for the communities that surround them. There are important things to say about each of these issues, but let me focus instead on two particular complaints about the nature and quality of undergraduate education in America.
One widely-held concern is that after four years of college, graduates aren’t prepared to do anything useful. Although this claim would seem to be refuted by the abundant evidence that the rate of return to a college education increased dramatically during the 1980s, consider this statement from John McArthur, the retiring Dean of the Harvard Business School: “In Northern Europe or Japan, they have technical high schools that focus on real careers in real industries, giving world-class technical education followed by apprenticeship programs. Students end up in their early 20s able to compete with all comers in the world. Here people go on to something called college, and chances are good after they finish that they are no closer to a [good career] than they were before.”1
A second concern, perhaps less widely held but even more fervently expressed, is that students are encouraged, even bullied, by their teachers to reject the cultural heritage of Western Civilization, to shun the great books of the West in the name of multiculturalism, and to accept “politically correct” orthodoxies. This concern is voiced frequently on the editorial pages of the Wall Street Journal, and in letters to university presidents. The dangers of politicizing the curriculum and relaxing standards of critical judgment have also been described by many thoughtful commentators within the academy – among them David Bromwich, Professor of English at Yale, whose brilliant book of essays, Politics by Other Means, I would recommend to anyone interested in understanding the “culture wars,” and Harold Bloom, Sterling Professor of the Humanities at Yale, whose remarkable book entitled The Western Canon I would recommend to anyone who can read.
Let me try to place contemporary doubts about our universities in proper historical context. Indeed, the two themes I have identified – skepticism about the practical utility of a college education and fear that universities might undermine prevailing values – are recurrent ones in American history. Tocqueville was among the first to observe closely the distinctively American skepticism about the value of knowledge for its own sake. He noted that Americans pursue scientific knowledge eagerly, not to edify the intellect, but as a means to material and physical comfort. As he put it, rather bluntly: “In aristocratic ages science is more particularly called upon to furnish gratification to the mind; in democracies, to the body.”2
Ambivalence about intellectual pursuits divorced from practical, material ends and concern about the morally corrosive effects of such pursuits have been persistent features of American culture. Motivated by the hostility shown to intellectuals during the McCarthy investigations of the 1950s, Richard Hofstadter published his Pulitzer Prize-winning history, Anti-Intellectualism in American Life, in which he traced the roots of our national skepticism about learning to the evangelicalism of the Great Awakening, through subsequent religious revivals, Jacksonian democracy, and recurrent outbursts of populism. He concluded that “anti-intellectualism is, in fact, older than our national identity. … [R]egard for intellectuals in the United States has not moved steadily downward … , but is subject to cyclical fluctuations.”3
The uniquely mixed American system of higher education reflects the national ambivalence about the life of the mind. The land grant colleges, which have grown to become our great public universities, were founded with the presumption that they would contribute directly to the useful arts, especially agriculture, through practical, results-oriented experimentation and dissemination, and their instructional methods were directed toward the education of pragmatic citizen-farmers. The older private universities and liberal arts colleges, though not unaffected by the American proclivity for pragmatism, were much closer in purpose and method to their European ancestors.4
Indeed, there is a direct line of influence running from the medieval University of Paris to Oxford to Cambridge to Harvard to Yale, and from Yale to Princeton, Columbia, Williams, Cornell, Johns Hopkins, and the University of Chicago, among others.
Let me address directly these two characteristically American fears about our universities by answering the following two sets of questions. First, what is the case for education divorced from immediate practical ends? Or, in other words, how can a liberal education be justified today? Second, what is the proper role of Western Civilization in the curriculum? What is the proper role of multiculturalism? And if the dissenting views of multiculturalists are to be tolerated, how should those of us who wish to resist what Arthur Schlesinger has called the “dis-uniting of America” conduct ourselves?
As defined by Cardinal Newman in his classic work, The Idea of a University, education is “liberal” when it is an end in itself, independent of practical consequences, directed to no specific purpose other than the free exercise of the mind.5
Liberal education cultivates the intellect and expands the capacity to reason and to empathize. Its object is not to convey any particular content, but to develop certain qualities of mind – the ability to think critically and independently, to liberate oneself from prejudice, superstition, and dogma.
Although the purpose of a liberal education is to develop habits of mind and not to acquire specific or “useful” knowledge, even Cardinal Newman recognized that liberal education could be defended on utilitarian grounds because it produces citizens who can make a genuine contribution to society.
“Training of the intellect,” Newman observes, “which is best for the individual himself, best enables him to discharge his duties to society. … If … a practical end must be assigned to a University course, I say it is that of training good members of society.” Newman continues: “It is the education which gives a man a clear conscious view of his own opinions and judgments, a truth in developing them, an eloquence in expressing them, and a force in urging them. It teaches him to see things as they are, to go right to the point, to disentangle a skein of thought, to detect what is sophistical, and to discard what is irrelevant. It prepares him to fill any post with credit, and to master any subject with facility.”6
Is this case as compelling today as it was one hundred and fifty years ago when Newman advanced it? I think it is. Of course, one might argue that in the Age of Information a properly educated person needs to master a specific and substantial body of information. But I would disagree. Indeed, the hallmark of the Age of Information is the astonishing ease with which one can acquire the information one needs when one needs it. The capacity to make frutiful use of vast quantities of information is what we really want our students to acquire. And that is precisely the object of a liberal education, to develop the capacity to reason independently, to sift through information and extract what is useful and, to use Newman’s words, “to discard what is irrelevant.” Presumably, one does not wish to produce for the twenty-first century businessmen and women who know nothing more than the technical tools of accounting, finance, and marketing, nor politicians who know nothing more than the tools of effective communication through the media. One wishes the leaders of the next century to have the ability to think independently and creatively, and, moreover, one wishes them to have formed that ability in the course of reflecting on questions broader than those involved in mastering the technologies of their respective callings.
This brings us to the question: what should be the content of a curriculum designed to provide a liberal education? Surely the student needs acquaintance with certain fundamental modes of organizing experience: mathematics, empirical science, historical, philosophical, and literary interpretation. This is the basis for the distribution requirements that most American colleges impose upon their students. But let me remind you that the subjects now broadly considered to be essential have not always enjoyed this status. In a report submitted to President Jeremiah Day in 1828, the faculty of Yale College claimed that there were subjects with which all educated persons should be familiar, but it recognized that “What … at one time has been held in little estimation, and has hardly found a place in a course of liberal instruction, has, under other circumstances, risen into repute, and received a proportional share of attention. … As knowledge varies, education should vary with it.”7
Thus, unlike our 18th century forbears, we consider the literatures of living languages to be appropriate, indeed essential, objects of study.
Contrary to what you may read in the newspapers, few on the faculty at Yale and its sister institutions doubt that the great works of Western Civilization warrant a central place in the curriculum. The great works of Western philosophy and political theory provide the intellectual foundation, and the subtlest critiques, of the institutions that dominate the economy and society in which we live: representative government, the rule of law, individual rights, free markets. This fact alone suffices to make the Western tradition an essential subject of study. But it is also true that we, and I mean “we” to be inclusive of all literate human beings, understand and realize ourselves more completely as persons if we read and confront the great works of Western literature. None of us is Oedipus or Hamlet or Cordelia or Anna Karenina, but their existence enriches ours, posing for us in human terms the most profound questions of morality and aesthetics, providing representations in terms of which we define ourselves.
Now it is true that even at Yale some scholars and teachers choose to emphasize the darker side of Western history – the institution of slavery, the subordination of women, the conquest and destruction of native cultures, and environmental degradation. These are, after all, facts, and they need to be confronted and understood. But this is not to say that the lenses of racism, sexism, and imperialism are the only ones through which Western experience is or should be seen nowadays, and they are certainly not the exclusive, nor the prevailing, perspective from which the West is regarded in the bulk of Yale’s courses devoted to the Great Books. Instead, old-fashioned as it may seem, most of our undergraduate courses on Shakespeare or Wordsworth, Plato or Kant, still wrestle with the question: what is the author trying to tell us about human experience?
What is it that people fear about dissenting views of the importance of Western Civilization? Multiculturalism begins with a recognition that American society, despite the Western European origin of its central political and economic institutions, is actually peopled with citizens of much more diverse backgrounds. It would seem quite appropriate to acknowledge and seek to understand the role of each of these groups in American life, and colleges and universities around the country have responded by encouraging curricular innovation in these areas.
But some advocates of multiculturalism want more; they call for a curriculum that explicitly rejects the values of Western European males and celebrates the values and institutions of historically disadvantaged groups. Such a position is particularly threatening when the Western values under assault include freedom of inquiry and expression, the necessary conditions for a university to be seriously engaged in the search for truth. At Yale we have been and will remain steadfast in our commitment to free expression. Political correctness involves, principally, an excessive sensitivity to the feelings of the historically disadvantaged, to the point of rewriting history and censoring art and literature to avoid “offending” these groups. This attitude is sharply at variance with everything the university stands for. History is to be understood, not rewritten. Just like the culture of the West, the cultures of historically disadvantaged groups are subjects worthy of study and critical scrutiny. The task of teacher and student is to question and seek truth, not to engage in mindless affirmation of the “politically correct” or any other unexamined dogma.
Oddly, many of those who fear that our students are being indoctrinated by the multiculturalists have a terribly naive view of what it means to study Western Civilization. According to William Bennett, the former Secretary of Education, studying Western culture is akin to being vaccinated. Nearly a decade ago, he wrote that our common culture was under assault by an adversarial culture that believes that “the U.S. is the incarnation of evil, the common enemy of mankind.” He continues: “Most Americans … reject the perverted culture of our adversaries. … Our common culture serves as a kind of immunological system, destroying the values and attitudes promulgated by our adversaries before they can infect the body politic.”8
Now this metaphor might have valuable content if, by “our common culture” Mr. Bennett had meant to refer to the habits of mind – the capacity to reason, to think critically and independently – which I earlier described as the object of a liberal education. But I think he intended something different. For Bennett, our common culture is a shared system of values and beliefs, a hodge-podge comprised of the “democratic” ethic, the “work” ethic, and the “Judeo-Christian” ethic.9
Regretably, this seems to be what too many advocates of reading the Great Books have in mind: by ingesting the Great Books and “appreciating” them, we will absorb the values located therein.
But the Great Books, taken as a whole, don’t present us with a unified system of values. They are in conversation with one another. Aristotle responds to Plato as Virgil responds to Homer as Milton responds to Virgil. Indeed, as Harold Bloom argues, a common feature of the canonical works is what he calls their strangeness, their profound originality. Each focuses on the human condition through a different and unique lens.
Nor are the Great Books, taken individually, didactic. They don’t contain a doctrine, a codification of values, a set of precepts about how one should live – like The Little Red Book of Chairman Mao. We don’t look to them for practical advice. We don’t come away from a reading of Oedipus Rex determined to ask for identification the next time we find it necessary to slay a stranger we encounter on the road. As Socrates observed, virtue is not a craft. One cannot learn how to live the good life from an instruction manual; it requires active engagement, thinking for oneself about one’s situation.
Why then are the Great Books great? They are great precisely because they challenge us to think for ourselves. They wrestle with the deepest and most difficult questions concerning human experience and moral behavior, and they are so rich in their characterization of that experience and behavior that they are open to profound differences in interpretation. In this respect, there’s a big difference between King Lear and Aesop’s fable of the tortoise and the hare. The Great Books are disturbing; they don’t deliver up a simple moral. They challenge us, each individual and each generation, to reinterpret them so that they become part of our own view of humanity and the world. And this, of course, is exactly why the Great Books deserve a central role in the curriculum of a liberal education. Unlike works that are less enduring or more limited in scope, and because they are so challenging and problematic, the Great Books are ideal materials for developing the reader’s capacity to think rigorously and independently. And the development of this capacity is, as I have repeatedly claimed, the object of liberal education.
At the core of America’s ambivalence about the mission of our universities is an apparent contradiction in our expectations. We expect our universities to preserve our cultural heritage, to pass it on to the next generation, and to educate the young to assume responsible positions of leadership. Thus, we expect our universities to perform the work of socialization. But we also expect our universities to be oases of freedom, safe harbors wherein the young can test their ideas, experiment, and explore in an atmosphere of complete freedom of inquiry and freedom of expression. How can we expect that, given the luxury of freedom to question everything, the young will emerge as responsible citizens, respectful of tradition and comfortable with the prevailing values of the larger society?
Our founding fathers resolved this apparent contradiction with confidence by asserting that from the free interplay of ideas, truth emerges. On no less a subject than religion, where the consequences of failing to accept received wisdom were, in his own word “serious,” Thomas Jefferson advised his nephew to “Fix reason firmly in her seat, and call to her tribunal every fact, every opinion. … [L]ay aside all prejudice on both sides, and neither believe nor reject anything, because any other persons … have rejected or believed it. Your own reason is the only oracle given you by heaven, and you are answerable, not for the rightness, but uprightness of the decision.”10
Jefferson’s answer was simple. In a regime of unfettered inquiry guided by reason, we should accept the conclusions of free and autonomous individuals of good will. Of course, we run the risk that received values and beliefs will be rejected. But, as educators, we can minimize the risk of unwise decisions by strengthening each individual’s capacity to reason and by protecting free inquiry and open debate. Under such circumstances, it is natural, indeed desirable, that each generation should reinterpret the past, redefine the culture for itself.
Perhaps Jefferson’s answer seems a little too simple today. Perhaps we are a little more skeptical than our Enlightenment forbears. But is there a serious alternative? Ultimately, the reason we believe in the mission of our universities is no different from the reason we believe in democracy. The fear that students will abuse their freedom by rejecting what is best in the culture they inherit is really no different from the fear that voters will abuse their freedom by electing the incompetent, the demogogue, or the tyrant. Can we really trust the people’s judgment? Here, too, the answer is that having faith in the judgment of free, autonomous individuals is better than the alternative, which is certain tyranny.
I close by asking once more: what do we seek to accomplish in educating America’s youth? Are not the words of Jefferson still apt?: “To develop the reasoning faculties of our youth, enlarge their minds, … And, generally, to form them to habits of reflection and correct action, rendering them examples of virtue to others, and of happiness within themselves.”11

1 Interview in the Wall Street Journal, March 13, 1995.
2 Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, New York: Vintage Books, 1945, Volume II, p. 46.
3 Richard Hofstadter, Anti-Intellectualism in American Life, New York: Vintage Books, 1962, p. 6.
4 In her recent inaugural address, my colleague Judith Rodin emphasized that the University of Pennsylvania was something of an exception among early American private institutions. Its founding purposes reflected Benjamin Franklin’s interest in the useful arts more than the European interest in the life of the mind.
5 John Henry Cardinal Newman, The Idea of a University, ed. Martin J. Svaglic (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1960), Discourse V.
6 Newman, Discourse VII.
7 Reports on the Course of Instruction in Yale College by a Committee of the Corporation and the Academical Faculty, New Haven: Hezekiah Howe, 1828, p. 31.
8 From a 1986 speech supplied by the U.S. Department of Education to David Bromwich and cited in Bromwich, Politics by Other Means, New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1992, p. 91.
9 See the discussion in Bromwich, op. cit., pp. 90-91.
10 Thomas Jefferson, Letter to Peter Carr, August 10, 1787, in The Complete Jefferson, ed. Saul K. Padover (New York: Duell, Sloan & Pearce, Inc., 1943), pp. 1058-59.
11 Thomas Jeffereson, Report of the Commissioners for the University of Virginia, meeting on Rockfish Gap, on the Blue Ridge, to the Legislature of the State, August 1-4, 1818, in The Complete Jefferson, p. 1098.
 