 Thank you Roger and Matt both for the invitation to speak to the Chamber and for your exemplary leadership on behalf of the center city and the entire region.
It is a particular pleasure for me to share the dais today with Community Leadership Award winner Dick Grossi and Legislative Leadership Award winners Marty Looney and Chris DePino. In ways too countless to mention, Dick, Marty, and Chris have been terrific citizens and advocates for the Greater New Haven region.
It is also a pleasure to be here this morning in the company of all of the individual and corporate award winners, including Seton Identification Products, founded and led so ably for many years by Yale’s distinguished alumnus, Fenmore Seton, who has been a long-time leader in promoting collaboration between New Haven and Yale.
In selecting a topic this morning, I decided not to speak about the massive renovations that are underway on our campus, nor about the changes we are pursuing to improve the quality of our programs and hold down the rapidly escalating cost of a college education. Nor will I speak about Yale’s future nor the future of higher education, though, as we prepare for our three hundredth birthday just four years from now, we have been giving much thought to these matters.
Instead, I have chosen a topic relevant and important to this community, to Yale and to our institutional colleagues throughout the region. And that is the role of the university as urban citizen.
This role is not a new one for higher education. Colleges and universities in America have always been conceived of as a force in public life and for the public good. Thus, Yale’s original charter notes a mission of educating students for service in church and civil state, and Albertus Magnus’ more recent mission statement focuses on the college being “aware of and ready to respond to the evolving needs of its own students and of society at large.” We all know that Albertus has been pursuing this mission with vigor and success under the leadership of Julia McNamara, who fittingly received the Seal of the City award earlier this month.
Obviously the role of colleges and universities in urban life is an issue of local significance. The six institutions of higher education in greater New Haven are increasingly prominent players in the socio-economic life of the region. Among us, we have 13,200 employees and a total payroll in excess of $560 million. Universities are the largest employers in Hamden and New Haven, significant employers in West Haven and North Haven, and major employers of residents from all towns in the region. Our six institutions combined enroll more than 38,000 students a year and we offer a comprehensive spectrum of higher education, from two year technical degrees to four year liberal arts education and the most advanced doctoral research.
But New Haven is not unique in this regard, as institutions of higher education and affiliated academic medical centers have come to be primary engines of urban and regional economies throughout the nation.
From 1990 to 1995, employment in colleges and universities nationally rose by 6%, while employment in manufacturing declined by 2%.
In Providence, Indianapolis, San Diego, and even San Francisco, a university is the largest employer. In Philadelphia the three largest private employers are the University of Pennsylvania, Temple, and Thomas Jefferson University.
In Pittsburgh, once a major manufacturing center, health care is the largest employment sector, followed by higher education. The two combined have more than five times as many employees as manufacturing.
Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University has 14,375 employees, triple the size of the next largest employer.
In Birmingham, Alabama - long the major iron and steel manufacturing center in the south - the University of Alabama at Birmingham is now five times larger than USX or American Cast Iron Pipe.
In all, in more than 40% of all U.S. cities, eds and meds represent at least three of the top five employers.
As colleges and universities, in New Haven and throughout the nation, we now find ourselves not only charged with our historic missions, we find that our institutions have become more central than ever to the public good and socio-economic well-being of the great metropolitan areas which are the hearts of our society. And conversely our futures are tied more than ever to the future of America’s cities.
In the past four years, we at Yale have taken the initiative to form many partnerships for a stronger community, but we are not alone.
The University of New Haven, under Larry DeNardis’ leadership, has reached out in new and vigorous ways - through the contributions of the Tourism Resource Center and the Center for Family Business to economic revival in the region, through programs in public safety that have supported community policing.
John Lahey has not only done a remarkable job of building the Quinnipiac College campus and programs of study, he has also linked the school more closely with Hamden and the region, with the work of the Center for Corporate and Professional Training and collaborations to assist dislocated workers among many notable efforts.
Mike Adanti and his colleagues at Southern have initiated exemplary partnerships with the New Haven Public Schools, such as the teacher preparation program at Hillhouse that provides a pathway for high school students to become public school teachers in the future, thus continuing the proud tradition of teacher education which is at the core of Southern’s academic distinction.
We at Yale have been pleased to collaborate for many years with Gateway Community-Technical College on the New Haven Residents’ Training Program, which is but one of many efforts the College has undertaken to support economic self-sufficiency and life-long learning for residents of greater New Haven. As Matt noted at the inauguration of President Diana Van Der Ploeg a few weeks ago, Gateway makes invaluable contributions to New Haven businesses. We all look forward to Gateway’s continued success during the tenure of its new president.
In my four years as President of Yale I have made our work with the City and citizens of New Haven a central priority. I did so in part out of concern for the future of our institution. We draw our students from across the nation and around the world, and, in 1993, many in the extended Yale community - alumni around the country - were worried that the perception of a declining New Haven would compromise Yale’s ability to attract the very best students and professors.
My predecessor had recognized this and efforts to strengthen the City had been initiated, such as the major investment in the Ninth Square redevelopment and an agreement to make a voluntary contribution for fire services to the City government. But our involvement, though genuine, was still episodic and opportunistic. We had no coherent plan and no internal organization to support it.
On becoming President, I recruited Linda Lorimer to provide leadership for our New Haven effort. She developed a comprehensive strategic plan, set up an Office of New Haven Affairs and, shortly afterward, consolidated all our local real estate holdings into one centrally managed portfolio. Recognizing the strong asset of student voluntary service in the community, I moved quickly to create the President’s Public Service Fellowship, which has funded full-time work in the summers by 74 students in public and nonprofit sector service agencies and which will continue to grow in years to come.
Although the local papers have described one by one most of the particular projects we are pursuing, I wanted to take a few minutes to put these projects and our efforts in the larger context. We identified three key areas of focus: economic development, human development, and neighborhood revitalization.
I won’t try to detail all of what we have undertaken, but let me identify instead some important themes. The first of these is partnership: we seek not what we can dofor or to New Haven, but rather what we can dowith the City and its citizens. There are, understandably, deeply ingrained suspicions of Yale among many in our community, which carry with them the potential for political resistance to our involvement. We thus approach each initiative with an eye to the possibility of partnership - with the business community, with the Mayor and City agencies, with the Department of Economic and Community Development, with the public schools, with neighborhood development corporations, or with other community leaders. Let me give a few examples.
In the Dwight neighborhood, we have worked closely with the Greater Dwight Development Corporation and the Hospital of Saint Raphael to develop a comprehensive plan for neighborhood revitalization. Yale was successful in securing one of six Joint Community Development Grants from HUD to implement the neighborhood’s plans. HUD’s $2.4 million grant will be matched by $6 million in matching funds and in-kind support from Yale and other institutions to hire neighborhood residents for community development, promote retail development, and renovate and rehabilitate blighted housing. An early sign of a renewal can be seen on Whalley Avenue now as construction has begun on a new Shaw’s supermarket.
In the past four years, we have expanded our partnerships with the New Haven Public Schools. Our Schools of Medicine and Nursing are academic partners with New Haven’s Career High School, which will be moving close to the medical center in September at a new campus as a regional school. Our faculty and students work with faculty and students at Career to strengthen teaching and learning, and Career faculty have received electronic media training at Yale. We have also established partnerships with other schools, such as that among the School of Music and other arts institutions at Yale and the Cooperative Arts and Humanities High School. And just yesterday, we launched the America Reads program with Timothy Dwight Elementary School, which is providing every third-grader in the school with a Yale student literacy tutor three afternoons a week.
The Yale Child Study Center has established a close working relationship with the New Haven Police, supporting community policing by providing counselors on-call 24 hours a day to respond to crimes where children are affected, as victims or family members. We have also offered training on child development issues to the leadership and new recruits of the police department.
We have worked with the Chamber and others in the business community on a series of partnerships to further civic goals: saving the Shubert theater, supporting the International Festival of Arts and Ideas, creating the Town Green Special Services District, rescuing the Pilot Pen Tennis Tournament, and bringing minor league baseball to the region.
I could list dozens of other collaborative efforts, but let me move on to a second theme, and that is our own work to change the behavior of the Yale community in ways that benefit New Haven.
In 1994, Yale began the Buy in New Haven program to channel more of our purchasing to City businesses. Spending by Yale for the selected group of routinely purchased items grew from $7.9 million to $10.6 million in 1996. We have also worked closely with vendors to help them understand Yale, helping a start-up pasta manufacturer, for example, to identify the equipment needed to make the products our dining halls would purchase. I mention this program in particular because it is one which every business here can replicate. Whether you are located in the suburbs or the city, the health of New Haven is key to the entire region and deserves our support. If each of you were to look closely at your expenditures, you may well find that there are many items that could be purchased from local and regional vendors instead of other suppliers you may be using.
We also launched the Homebuyer Program in 1994, which offers a cash benefit to Yale employees who buy homes in New Haven. To date, 275 Yale employees have purchased homes in the City. Yale’s commitment of nearly $6 million dollars has yielded $30 million worth of home purchases and has been part of the stabilization of the residential real estate market in New Haven. It is notable that in the second phase of the program, targeted to those neighborhoods most in need of home ownership, 90% of the purchasers have been first-time homebuyers. We are pleased to see that other local employers - including the City of New Haven - have followed our lead here by providing some form of mortgage subsidy for purchasing a home within the City.
Finally, we are also stepping up our efforts internally to transform the findings of our research scientists into marketable products. The current market value of companies created from the transfer of Yale research is more than $1 billion. Over 25 New Haven area companies are spin-offs, including Alexion, Neurogen, and Vion. But we know more can and must be done and that is why I have greatly expanded our investment in the Office of Cooperative Research. This internal change at Yale allows us to be even more vigorous partners with the business community, the City, and the State, to grow our region’s biotechnology industry further.
Reflection on these two successful programs lead me to a third theme: the importance of leadership.
The Homebuyer Program has powerful economic incentives, but I believe the psychological incentives are equally important. Our employees are responsive to strongly articulated institutional priorities. Deans and Directors have followed the institution’s lead and initiated many programs of outreach and collaboration so that working with New Haven has become central not only to the administration of Yale but to the whole Yale community.
We are now moving to a new stage in the evolution of our New Haven Initiative. Linda Lorimer was the perfect entrepreneur to energize both the Yale and New Haven communities. I know that many of you have had the opportunity to work with her and know just how tenacious a champion she is for this community. But as long as a year and a half ago, Linda and I realized that we could only carry Yale’s urban efforts so far - we needed the help of a real pro.
Building on our successes thus far, we will, beginning in May, have the talents and leadership of Bruce Alexander as Vice President and Director of New Haven and State Affairs. Bruce was for two decades Senior Vice President of the Rouse Company and supervised some of the country’s major downtown revitalization projects: the South Street Seaport in Manhattan, the Inner Harbor of Baltimore, the RiverWalk in New Orleans, and other downtown projects totaling over $1 billion. He will join forces with the Chamber’s leadership and the Mayor in the service of New Haven’s renaissance.
In closing, let me note that there is clear evidence that the work all of us gathered here today is making a positive difference. There is new retail development in downtown. The Omni Hotel will be an asset for the region. Statistics show a significant drop in crime downtown for the first six months of this year. The arts are flourishing. Tennis has a vital new lease on life, and we are poised for major growth in the biotechnology sector.
There are many solid reasons to be optimistic, but we all know that many challenges lie ahead. We must improve the airport and attract more jet service to key hubs. We must strengthen public education in the City and suburbs alike. We must find ways to create employment opportunities for our region’s most disadvantaged citizens.
Yale’s commitment to partnership will not be short-lived. Because our future as one of the world’s great educational institution depends upon our collective success, we will be with New Haven and the region as a vigorous corporate citizen for the long haul. We look forward to the challenge and to many years of continuing partnership.
 