 Thank you. On behalf of everyone at Yale who is working toward the betterment of New Haven, I am deeply grateful for this award.
On April 15, 1993, I accepted the invitation to serve Yale as its President. In my acceptance speech that morning, I announced my intention to make Yale’s relations with New Haven one of my major priorities.
That evening, in the back yard of our home on Everit Street, about two hundred neighbors gathered for a spontaneous celebration. They sensed, even more clearly than I could articulate, that town-gown relations were about to take a dramatic turn for the better. Many of our neighbors knew me as a coach of youth baseball at Blake Field. Thus, it seemed entirely fitting when Ann Schmalz, the wife of our tenth ward alderman, circulated for everyone’s signature not a hardball, which might well have symbolized times gone by, but a softball, to signal the times that were to come.
Within a few weeks of assuming the Presidency, I determined that there was only one way to mobilize the whole Yale community - school by school, program by program – to commit itself to partnership with New Haven. I needed a tireless, brilliant, dynamic leader to take full-time responsibility for this initiative. In accepting this award I hope you recognize that it belongs equally to the person who fits this description, the person who turned good intentions into reality: Linda Lorimer. Four years later, with Yale fully committed to sustained engagement with the city, Linda and I realized that we needed a true urban affairs professional to guide Yale’s further efforts. For his thoughtful, clear-headed understanding, for his patient leadership, and especially for his willingness to uproot himself and his wife Chris from their comfortable life and active participation in Baltimore to serve New Haven and Yale, I want to thank Bruce Alexander. Supporting Linda and Bruce in their efforts are far more administrators, faculty members, and students than I could possibly name. I am grateful to them all, and especially grateful to the legions of students engaged in community service. They are Yale’s best ambassadors. For the average citizen of New Haven, nothing more effectively communicates the sincerity of Yale’s commitment than encounters with these energetic and altruistic leaders of tomorrow.
Partnerships require willingness on both sides, and perhaps no aspect of Yale’s increased community involvement has been more gratifying than the response we have received from neighborhood organizations, city officials, the business community, the Chamber of Commerce and Matt Nemerson in particular, and most especially from the Mayor of New Haven. It was a fortunate alignment of the stars that brought John DeStefano to City Hall only months after I assumed the Yale presidency. I admire his inspired leadership, his vision, his determination to improve the quality of life in New Haven, and his friendship. And, don’t worry John, I get the message, we have much, much more to do. Our work together has just begun. One more thank you, to an active community volunteer and leader, a devoted citizen of New Haven, the one who taught me everything I know about partnership, my wife Jane.
There is so much more to be done to revitalize our downtown and our neighborhoods, to strengthen our schools, and to create jobs built upon the fruits of Yale’s outstanding research in science and engineering. I want to assure you that Yale is committed for the long run. I want to make urban citizenship a permanent thread in the fabric of Yale, and town-gown partnership a permanent thread in the fabric of New Haven. On behalf of the University, I want to thank the Greater New Haven Chamber of Commerce for recognizing the importance of these ambitions.
 