 I have always known this to be an extraordinary community, and to see all of you this evening is only to confirm what I have believed.
Unthinkable acts of terror were perpetrated against thousands of innocent victims. This is a tragedy that disturbs the integrity of our nation and threatens the peace of the planet. And it is a tragedy that reaches in personal terms to all of us.
What makes this moment so terrible is that there remains so much uncertainty. We not only grieve for the victims of this tragedy, but we suffer along with those who are still uncertain about the fate of family members and friends. At times such as these, we must come together as a community. Reach out to one another. Support one another.
Yale is a community of concern, and to those of you who grieve and to those of you who are afraid, I say, we will do everything we can to help and support you. I know that the generosity of spirit that pervades this community will prevail. I know that you will all help one another. But to those who need more, I say, please seek help. Your deans, masters, teachers, all of the representatives of the Yale religious ministries, and the mental hygiene staff of the University Health Service - we are all here for you, day and night.
We need to pull together as a community and help those with special vulnerability. Most obviously, those from the New York City and Washington areas who fear for loved ones. But also the new members of our community, first-year students who do not yet have deep roots here. Reach out especially to them.
We must also not rush to judgment. We do not yet know who was responsible for these attacks, but we should remember that it was the work of individuals - not the work of a people, a race, or a unified nation. Let us not fracture our community.
Finally, I would ask you to consider what you might do to help the victims of this tragedy. There is an urgent need for contributions of blood. I would urge you to go to Yale-New Haven Hospital tomorrow after 7 a.m. or to the Omni-New Haven Hotel after 8 a.m. to give blood. Yale shuttle buses and vans will be available all day to take you to these locations.
Above all, take this occasion to care for one another, to pray for those who suffer in grief or uncertainty, to pray for justice and for peace on earth.
 