 I am greatly honored to be with you today as a representative of colleges and universities throughout the nation and around the globe. I am pleased to extend our warmest greetings to fair Harvard as Lawrence Summers assumes the Presidency of this great institution. We welcome President Summers as a colleague, and we congratulate you on your felicitous choice.
Harvard is blessed with the broadest and deepest assembly of intellectual talent and academic resources in the world, and it is to Harvard that the whole world looks for leadership. These are mere facts, but, believe me, these are not easy things for a Yale president to say. Indeed, before uttering these words of praise, I made a study of how, on occasions such as this one, my predecessors have managed to avoid a straightforward concession of Harvard’s primacy.
The classic example is found in the remarks of Yale’s fourteenth president, James Rowland Angell, at your Tercentenary Celebration in 1936. Here is what he says about Harvard: “In the somewhat fatuous and futile comparisons of institutions with one another, so dear to the heart of certain rather literal and metallic”minded folk, she is often put first.” Note that Angell is not conceding much here. He then adds: “and judged by many criteria she doubtless deserves such a rating.” Even the most generous reading of this statement suggests that there are other criteria by which Harvard does not deserve such a rating. And any self”respecting deconstructionist would hasten to point out the more sinister reading, namely, that Harvard deserves its high ranking only when judged by the silly criteria of small”minded people.
True, President Angell went on to heap much praise on Harvard, using all of the following words and phrases in his very next sentence: vision, imagination, wisdom, moral courage, candor, intellectual liberty, integrity, and intelligence. But think about it. All considered, Angell said nothing that might have caused consternation in New Haven. I trust that I, too, have passed this test, though I have deliberately skated closer to the line.
This year, 2001, was supposed to be Yale’s year. Sixty”five years after your Tercentenary, it is our Tercentennial. (Note that we continue to resist following Harvard’s lead.) And this year the United States of America inaugurated as President its third consecutive Yale alumnus. But, alas, Harvard was not about to let us garner all the headlines. First, you choose a brilliant scholar and highly visible national leader as your new president. And then, aided and abetted by an otherwise loyal Yale graduate, David McCullough, the entire nation, already aware of the greatness of two Roosevelts and a Kennedy, is reminded of the extraordinary intelligence and passion of Harvard’s first great national leader, John Adams.
Adams was a devoted son of Harvard all of his life, and toward the end he only left Quincy for one reason - to attend Harvard commencements. He would be the first to recognize the difficulty and importance of the tasks confronting President Summers. When Thomas Jefferson sought his advice about the proper organization and curriculum of the new University of Virginia, Adams’ first reaction was to throw up his hands at the enormity of the challenge. He writes, passionately: “Education! Oh Education! The greatest Grief of my heart and the Greatest Affliction of my Life! To my mortification, I must confess that I have never closely thought, or very deliberately reflected upon the Subject, which never occurs to me now, without producing a deep Sigh, a heavy groan and sometimes Tears.” This lamentation did not prevent Adams from proceeding to spell out, in some detail, a thoughtful and comprehensive plan for Jefferson’s consideration.
Even without the benefit of John Adams’ advice, your new president, a distinguished economist and public servant, is exceptionally well prepared to meet the challenges of the years ahead. The events of the last month have made the task of leadership both different and more important. We look to the faculty of this great university to help us comprehend new threats to liberty and world order. We look also to President Summers to uphold Harvard’s ancient commitment to free inquiry, free expression, and reasoned debate as the quest for understanding proceeds.
Last week, at Yale’s Tercentennial Convocation, President Summers quoted John F. Kennedy’s reminder that universities are “always enlisted against the spread of illusion.” In these difficult times, we, the universities of this nation and the entire civilized world, are proud to stand alongside Harvard in this noble cause.
 