It is an exceptional pleasure and a great honor to be with you today. Peking University is known throughout the world for its important influence on the civilization and culture of China and for the legions of its graduates who have made major contributions to this nation’s history and progress. I am grateful for the invitation of President Xu to visit your institution, for the very warm welcome that we have received, and for the opportunity to address you this morning.

This year marks the three hundredth anniversary of the founding of Yale University. We have chosen to mark this historic occasion by bringing a delegation of faculty, administrators, and one of our trustees to China.

Understanding China and developing relationships with its people and institutions are of great importance to us. I say this not only because of the size of your population, your significant role in world politics, and the immense potential of your rapidly growing economy. For a University such as Yale, which aspires to be among the greatest in the world, China is also important for the achievements of its ancient and continuous civilization, which is an unending source of learning and enlightenment for scholars who seek comprehensive understanding of the human condition.

Yale’s mission and the scope of its influence have evolved gradually over the past three centuries from a local to a regional to a national institution. The university has made a dramatic mark on American society by educating leaders in every field of endeavor. Four of the last six Presidents of the United States have Yale degrees; 55 of our graduates have served in the President’s Cabinet and 533 have served in the U.S. Congress. Yale graduates have led many of America’s best known business organizations - Coca-Cola and Procter and Gamble, Time Magazine and Federal Express, Goldman Sachs and J.P. Morgan, IBM and Real Networks. And Yale graduates served as the first Presidents of Princeton, Columbia, Cornell, and Johns Hopkins Universities, the University of Chicago, and the Universities of Georgia, Mississippi, Missouri, Wisconsin, and California.

Yale has also been an innovator in higher education within the United States. We were the first American university to establish a program in public health, a School of Nursing, a School of Fine Art, and a School of Forestry. We were the first to have an art museum, the first to appoint a professor of science, and the first to grant a Ph.D.

As Yale enters its fourth century, our goal is to become a truly global university - educating leaders and advancing the frontiers of knowledge not simply for the United States, but for the entire world.

The globalization of the university is in part an evolutionary development. Yale has drawn students from outside the United States for nearly two centuries, and international issues have been represented in its curriculum for the past hundred years and more. But creating the global university is also a revolutionary development - signaling distinct changes in the substance of teaching and research, the demographic characteristics of students, the scope and breadth of external collaborations and the engagement of the university with new audiences. Let me discuss in turn each of these aspects of the global university.

teaching and research
When I speak of becoming a global university, I envision a curriculum and a research agenda permeated by awareness that political, economic, social, and cultural phenomena in any part of the world can no longer be fully understood in isolation. The revolution in communications technology has brought the world closer together and changed the way we think about it.

The term “globalization” is much used these days, although we have yet to disentangle entirely its several meanings. In one sense globalization refers to economic interdependence. The movement of capital across national borders is now instantaneous, and the movement of products, people, and, unfortunately, pollution is freer and faster than ever before. These facts make comprehensive governance of the economy impossible at the level of the nation-state. International institutions are needed to regulate trade, capital flows, and environmental degradation. Isolation is not an option.

In another sense globalization refers to the instantaneous transmission of ideas and images. Cross-cultural influences have always been with us, but today they are more powerful because of their immediacy. Because we access the same web sites, radio and television broadcasts, many fear a growing homogenization of cultures and values. The incipiency of a common “global” culture has precipitated, in many parts of the world, a defensive reaction to protect “local” values, heightening tensions among neighboring ethnic, religious, and cultural groups.

Yale is well prepared to meet the challenge of understanding these developments. We teach 52 languages and offer over 600 courses on international topics - from International Trade to the History of Modern China to Global Problems of Population Growth.

A global university can be built upon this strong foundation, but the superstructure must encompass new forms as well as old. Because the world’s problems cannot be neatly compartmentalized into traditional academic categories, we are creating under the auspices of the Yale Center for International and Area Studies a set of special professorships for scholars whose work on international subjects extends beyond the boundaries of a single academic discipline. And, as a major new initiative of our Tercentennial year, we have announced the establishment of a new Yale Center for the Study of Globalization to be directed by Strobe Talbott, who recently completed eight years of service as our country’s Deputy Secretary of State. The Center will host visiting scholars and practitioners, support research, and foster the development of new teaching materials concerning globalization. In addition to embracing these traditional functions, the new Center will develop a professionally edited web site and a web-based journal of opinion. It will also sponsor the practice of “Track II diplomacy” - private efforts to educate and promote dialogue among representatives of opposing parties involved in regional or global conflict.

students
Just as building a global university requires us to expand our curriculum and re-focus our research, it also requires us to ask whom are we educating and for what purpose? Yale is proud to have educated the first Chinese to graduate from any American university. Yung Wing came to Yale in 1850 from Guandong province, and when he returned to China after graduation he became an advocate for improving technical education in his homeland. He organized the Chinese Educational Mission in 1872, which sent over one hundred young Chinese men to study in preparatory schools and then to enroll in colleges throughout New England. Over twenty of these young scholars came to Yale, among them Zhan Tianyou, who later became the “Father of China’s Railroads.”

Today, more than 30 per cent of Yale’s Ph.D. students are neither citizens nor permanent residents of the United States. Within the past six years we have increased the representation of international students in our undergraduate college from four to nearly eight per cent. Of all the world’s nations, China is by far the best represented at Yale, with 312 students enrolled in degree programs and an additional 232 visiting students, postdoctoral fellows, and scholars.

This representation of international students constitutes a strong foundation, but a global university must have aspirations beyond mere numbers. We have for some years offered international graduate students the same financial aid awards that we extend to U.S. citizens. But we want to be certain that we are also attracting the very best undergraduate students from around the world. To this end we recently announced that from now on we will admit international students to Yale College on exactly the same basis as we admit U.S. citizens. That is, we will admit students without regard to their ability to pay and offer the full financial assistance that they need to attend. We hope and expect that this new policy will have a profound effect on our ability to attract undergraduates from many countries around the world, including China, where families are typically unable to pay the full cost of a Yale education.

We not only provide generous financial aid for full-time students in residence at Yale, we also intend to increase the resources available for overseas study and exchange visits. We will soon expand the very successful Fox International Fellowship Program, which currently sponsors graduate student exchange visits with six major universities around the world - Cambridge University, the Free University of Berlin, the University of Paris, Moscow State University, Tokyo University, and Fudan University.

In addition to these various programs supporting international students at Yale, overseas study opportunities for Yale students, and exchange visits, we have chosen to mark our Tercentennial by launching an ambitious and innovative effort to provide a touchstone experience for emerging leaders from around the world. Beginning next year, the new Yale World Fellows Program will recruit a small group of emerging leaders representing all sectors of society and all regions of the world. The Fellows will spend an intensive twelve-week period at Yale studying global problems under the tutelage of our most distinguished professors. The program will encourage the Fellows to develop new skills and contacts that will serve them and their countries upon their return home. By holding regular reunions of all the Fellows, we would hope to create a network of world leaders who can draw upon one another’s strengths as their careers develop. We would expect China, the world’s largest nation, to be well represented in this exciting new program.

international collaborations
I have discussed how the creation of a global university will affect on-campus teaching and research, as well as the number and type of students we educate and the international experiences we provide for them. But an equally powerful impetus for change will come from increased opportunities to collaborate with other institutions.

Partnership in education and research is not a new concept. Indeed, the idea has long been employed successfully by the Yale-China Association, whose one hundredth anniversary we are celebrating this year in conjunction with the University’s Tercentennial. During its first half century Yale-China’s work was concentrated principally in Changsha and Wuhan, where it helped to found the Yali Middle School, the Hsiang-Ya Hospital, Medical College, and Nursing School, and Huachung University. Today, four Yale College graduates teach English each year at the Yali School, and the Yale School of Nursing has several active collaborations with Hunan Medical University, including a “train-the-trainer” program that teaches Chinese nurses how to teach other nurses to prevent the transmission of blood borne pathogens.

In all, Yale has more than twenty active collaborations with Chinese universities, health care organizations, and government agencies. Among these is a multifaceted partnership with the Union School of Public Health in Beijing to make significant changes in public health education, as well as several research and training programs in the area of forest management and natural resource sustainability.

Two new and very significant collaborative projects will be officially launched this week during our visit to Beijing. Here at Peking University, we will be officially dedicating today a recently established research partnership in the area of plant genomics and agricultural biotechnology. This is a fully collaborative project involving exchange visits of scientists from both Yale and Peking University as they work together to study the basic biology of plant systems with potential relevance to crop improvement in both China and the United States.

Tomorrow, we will be announcing the creation of the China Law Center, a collaboration of the Yale Law School, several Chinese law schools and institutes, the State Council Office of Legislative Affairs, and the Legislative Affairs Commission of the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress. The new Center, led by Professor Paul Gewirtz, has formed project teams of consisting of leading legal scholars, judges, other government officials, and practicing lawyers from both China and the United States. Together, they will address the issues of judicial reform, administrative law, and legal education.

These collaborations exemplify the future of scholarship and service in the global university. They permit scholars and scientists to share expertise in the pursuit of new knowledge and in the application of that knowledge to improving material and social conditions. They will flourish best if scholars are free to ask questions, collect information, and conduct research. We are proud to be deeply engaged in so many partnerships here in China, and we look forward to expanding the scope of cooperative activity in the future.

new audiences
The same advances in communications technology that have created the phenomenon we call globalization offer substantial opportunities for the global university to expand its educational mission. The Yale web site already contains many audio and video reproductions of lectures and conferences that have recently taken place on our campus, but we have only begun to tap the potential of the Internet to provide valuable on-line learning experiences for students around the world.

To this end, Yale has recently joined with Oxford, Princeton, and Stanford Universities in an alliance to develop on-line educational materials. Our approach is deliberately experimental. Some of our offerings will approximate conventional university “courses” in the arts and sciences, but we will also experiment with offerings of different duration and format. We will test some of these offerings next fall with audiences consisting principally of the alumni of our four universities, but eventually we hope to offer the best of what we develop to students and adult learners worldwide.

conclusion
In closing, I thank you for permitting me this opportunity to address you today. I hope that I have given you reason to reflect upon the impact of globalization on teaching and research, the students we educate, the partnerships we enter, and the audiences we will come to embrace. As Yale begins its fourth century, we are rising to the challenge of becoming a global university. We invite Peking University, our host and partner, and a great center of teaching and learning, to join us in this important effort.
