 We come together to remember and to affirm.
We remember the unspeakable acts of terror that were perpetrated against three thousand innocent victims.
We remember the bravery of the firefighters, rescue workers, and policemen who helped others to safety.
We remember the courage of the passengers who overcame their captors on flight 93 over Pennsylvania.
We remember the evening, one year ago, when we gathered as a community to express through silence and candlelight the grief, uncertainty, and fear that we shared with millions around the world.
We remember how in the days that followed this nation and many nations around the world came together to express compassion and a common humanity.
We remember also these lessons: that not all the world’s citizens see the world as Americans do, that to some our affluence is an affront, our personal freedom a blasphemy.
Still, we affirm the fundamental rights of all men and women to life and liberty.
We affirm the rule of law that protects these rights and the institutions – such as this University – that encourage men and women to express themselves freely and individually.
We affirm the strength and wisdom that come to those who tolerate and appreciate differences among people.
We affirm that intolerance is the enemy of wisdom and that lawless terror has no rightful place among civilized peoples.
In the book that is the common heritage of Jews, Christians and Muslims is this prayer: “Let justice roll down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream.” We all long for that day, but we must remember that justice begins not with anger or indignation but with truth. This is why, in democratic societies, we assign responsibility for meting out justice not to the “street” but to the deliberation of legislatures and courts. Our founders expected such deliberation to be guided neither by divine revelation nor blind adherence to doctrine but by the careful weighing of evidence. In Jefferson’s words: “Your … reason is the only oracle given you by Heaven.”
In the aftermath of September 11 we are faced with questions of immense difficulty and profound consequence. How can we reduce the risk of terror without excessive compromise of personal freedom? How can we bring stability and peace to the Middle East? How can we help to alleviate the poverty and suffering that can be turned to hatred?
We must not answer these questions reflexively, with doctrine or dogma. We need to rely on facts and sound reasoning, not ideology. We need to tackle the questions raised by September 11 with the same open-mind spirit of critical inquiry that guides us in the classroom, library, and laboratory.
Last night at Morse College I had the privilege of participating in a discussion of the lessons of September 11 with about thirty students. Diverse in nationality and ethnicity, with intelligence, passion, and deep respect for one another, the students expressed their views forcefully and listened attentively. The conversation was a model of civility and open-mindedness.
Tonight, we remember and we affirm. Tomorrow, let us continue the conversation. Let us continue to wrestle with the questions of our day. Grateful for the freedom we enjoy in this University and in this nation, let us continue the search for light and truth.
 