 It is a pleasure to be with you today, and I thank especially those of you who have come from afar to hear about Yale’s efforts to mark its fourth century by becoming a truly global university.
When I became president nearly ten years ago, there were two monumental tasks that cried out for immediate attention. First, the magnificent collection of buildings, many of which were built in the years between the two world wars, had been woefully neglected. A nearly comprehensive renovation of the campus was an imperative simply to provide the most basic support for teaching, research, and residential life. Second, conditions in the city of New Haven, once a relatively prosperous manufacturing town, had deteriorated badly. Much of the downtown was abandoned, industrial jobs had departed to the south or offshore, and most of the city’s neighborhoods were badly blighted. To attract the best students and faculty from around the world something had to be done.
I am pleased to report that we have made great progress on these two fronts. We have invested over $1.6 billion in the renewal of our campus, with spectacular results. Five residential colleges have been transformed to meet virtually every imaginable recreational and social need of our undergraduates, and the others will be renovated one a year in sequence. The Sterling Library, the Law and Divinity Schools, the Payne Whitney Gymnasium, and our principal classroom buildings have all been dramatically transformed. Likewise, we have invested over $100 million to catalyze the revival of the city of New Haven. The downtown is now vital and vibrant, with fifteen new restaurants opening in the past year alone, and with old commercial buildings transformed into apartment buildings the streets are no longer deserted at night, but instead they have become safe, lively, and dynamic. Building upon the foundation of Yale’s strength in the biomedical sciences, we have spun off twenty-five regional biotechnology firms in the past decade, seventeen of them located within the city limits. New Haven is on its way to becoming a major center for science-based industry.
With the tasks of rebuilding our campus and our city well under way, and with the resources provided by the spectacular growth of our endowment and the extraordinary generosity of our alumni, we entered our fourth century in 2001 prepared to make new investments that would broaden the scope of Yale’s mission and strengthen its contribution to the advancement of knowledge and to human welfare. Two such investments stand out by their magnitude and ambition. First, by investing $1 billion in the science, engineering, and medicine over the next decade, we intend to push Yale into the very top ranks in these fields that are so central to the growth of the modern economy. To be one of the world’s best universities fifty years from now, it will not be sufficient to excel in the humanities, the fine arts, the social sciences and the law; we will need to be among the very best in science and technology. And so we are moving forward. A $175 million medical research building opened this month, a new environmental science center opened last year, and this summer we begin construction of new buildings for chemistry and biomedical engineering. And, as we hoped, our well-publicized commitment to upgrading and expanding our science facilities has already enabled us to recruit scientists of a caliber that has raised envious eyebrows at MIT and Stanford. One of these, I am sorry to say, is Michel Devoret, one of the most outstanding young applied physicists in France, whose pathbreaking work on quantum computing is likely to transform the computer industry a quarter century from now.
The second major institutional objective, as we begin our fourth century, is to establish Yale as a thoroughly global university, and it is this effort that Ernesto Zedillo, Linda Lorimer and I wish to sketch for you this evening. I will set out the overall framework that his guided our work to internationalize the university. Then President Zedillo, whom we are delighted to have among us on our campus, will describe one of our major new initiatives, the Yale Center for the Study of Globalization. Finally, Yale Vice President and Secretary Linda Lorimer, who is responsible for alumni activities and public affairs, will offer a few comments about the administrative support that is being mounted to reach out to our international alumni and advance our global agenda. At the conclusion of her remarks, we would be happy to respond to your questions.
Before I set all this in context, let me just note the specific initiatives we have undertaken in the past four years to strengthen the University’s programs and presence:
We have extended need-blind admissions and need-blind financial aid to international applicants to Yale College;
We have increased financial aid in the Graduate School so that every admitted student, whether foreign or domestic, has free tuition and a generous annual stipend;
We have created a new Office of International Students and Scholars which offers greatly improved support services as well as visa and immigration counsel;
We have established a new Center for Language Study, which is becoming a national model;
We have tripled the budget of the Yale Center for International and Area Studies and introduced under its auspices new programs in South Asian studies, Agrarian Studies, International Political Economy, and Ethnicity, Race, and Migration;
Thanks to the generosity of Joe Fox ‘38, we have established new graduate student exchange programs with seven leading universities around the world, including Sciences Po here in Paris;
We have created three new endowed professorships for distinguished scholars with an interdisciplinary focus on international affairs;
As I mentioned, we have established the Center for the Study of Globalization under the leadership of Ernesto Zedillo;
We have inaugurated of the Yale World Fellows Program for emerging international leaders;
In the person of John Longbrake, who is with us this evening, we have appointed a press officer in the Office of Public Affairs to focus exclusively on promoting Yale in the international media; and
We have formed a President’s Council on International Activities to advise me on how best to advance the University’s global agenda.
* * * * *
Let me step back now and place this all in context. As the excerpt in your program indicates, the globalization of the university is in part an evolutionary development. Yale has drawn students from outside the United States for nearly two centuries, and international issues have been represented in its curriculum for the past hundred years and more. But creating the global university is also a revolutionary development - signaling distinct changes in the substance of teaching and research, the demographic characteristics of students and scholars, the scope and breadth of external collaborations, and the engagement of the university with new audiences.
Let me touch in turn upon each of these four aspects of globalizing the university.
Teaching and Research
When I speak of becoming a global university, I envision a curriculum and a research agenda permeated by awareness that political, economic, social, and cultural phenomena in any part of the world can no longer be fully understood in isolation. The revolution in communications technology has brought the world closer together and changed the way we think about it.
The term “globalization” is much used these days, although we have yet to disentangle entirely its several meanings. In one sense globalization refers to economic interdependence. The movement of capital across national borders is now instantaneous, and the movement of products, people, and, unfortunately, pollution is freer and faster than ever before. These facts make comprehensive governance of the economy impossible at the level of the nation-state. International institutions are needed to regulate trade, capital flows, and environmental degradation. Isolation is not an option.
In another sense globalization refers to the instantaneous transmission of ideas and images. Cross-cultural influences have always been with us, but today they are more powerful because of their immediacy. Because we access the same web sites, radio and television broadcasts, many fear a growing homogenization of cultures and values. The incipiency of a common “global” culture has precipitated, in many parts of the world, a defensive reaction to protect “local” values, heightening tensions among neighboring ethnic, religious, and cultural groups.
Yale is well prepared to meet the challenge of understanding these developments. We teach 52 languages, and through the new Center for Language Study we are serving better those students whose primary interest is to develop fluency in speaking, rather than to master the classics of a national literature. We offer over 600 courses on international topics, and the Yale Center for International and Area Studies sponsors programs of teaching and research focused on each of the world’s major regions.
A global university can be built upon this strong foundation, but the superstructure must encompass new forms as well as old. Because the world’s problems cannot be neatly compartmentalized into traditional academic categories, we have seen a flowering of interdisciplinary programs, such as the Center for Law and Environmental Policy, the International Institute for Corporate Governance, and the Center for Interdisciplinary Research on HIV/AIDS, as well as the Center for the Study of Globalization that President Zedillo will describe shortly.
Students and Scholars
Just as building a global university requires us to expand our curriculum and re-focus our research, it also requires us to ask whom are we educating and for what purpose? A record number of 1,775 international students from 101 different countries are enrolled in Yale academic programs this year; in other words, over 16% of the University-wide student body this year is neither a U.S. citizen nor a permanent resident. In both the Graduate School and the Yale School of Management, over one-third of our students come from abroad, and the Forestry and Music Schools are close behind. The last decade has seen an overall increase of more than 25% in the number of international students.
Except for Canadians, Yale College has historically had a very small complement of international students. When I became President, only one out of 50 students in the College was neither U. S. nor Canadian. Now it is one in twelve, which ensures that most U.S. citizens in the College now have international students among their closest friends.
As the numbers of international students in Yale College rise, their composition is changing because of our Tercentennial decision to admit international students to Yale College on exactly the same basis as we admit U.S. citizens. That is, we admit students without regard to their ability to pay and offer the full financial assistance that they need to attend. This new policy - now in its second full year - is having a profound effect on our ability to attract undergraduates from many countries around the world.
And it is not only international students who are changing the face of Yale, but also the visiting international scholars who come to campus to assume research and teaching responsibilities, to collaborate with colleagues or to observe in laboratory, classroom or clinical settings. Their numbers have more than doubled in a decade. We have over 1550 international scholars on campus this year.
International Collaborations
I have discussed how the creation of a global university will affect on-campus teaching and research, as well as the number and type of students we educate. But an equally powerful impetus for change will come from increased opportunities to collaborate with other institutions.
Let me offer two very different example; both involve a sustained commitment with another institution.
Picture walking on the campus of Peking University. You will see today a building with exterior signage that reads the “Yale-Peking Joint Center for Plant Molecular Genetics and Agricultural Biotechnology.” At this center, which is one of twenty international partnerships Yale has with Chinese institutions, Yale and Chinese faculty and graduate students are using genetic technologies to increase crop production. Scientists from the Center come regularly to New Haven to build on the collaboration. Just two weeks ago, Yale’s lead faculty member on the project -himself a graduate of Peking University (Xing Weng Deng) - was announced as the recipient of the Kumho Award for the year’s most outstanding contribution to plant biology.
My second example of collaboration is one that is being created as we speak. Yale’s Dean of Public Health, Michael Merson and a number of his colleagues are in St. Petersburg working with the faculty of Putin’s alma mater to shape the curriculum for what will be Russia’s first school of public health and to define an ongoing relationship.
New Audiences
The same advances in communications technology that have created the phenomenon we call globalization offer substantial opportunities for the global university to expand its educational mission. The Yale web site already contains many audio and video reproductions of lectures and conferences that have taken place on our campus, but we have only begun to tap the potential of the Internet to provide valuable on-line learning experiences for students around the world.
To this end, Yale has joined with Oxford and Stanford Universities in an alliance to develop on-line educational materials. Our joint venture is called AllLearn.org. and is found under that name on the Web. Some of our offerings approximate conventional university “course” in the arts and sciences, but we are also experimenting with offerings of different duration and format. Last fall we had 50 courses available, and we now are making our on-line curriculum available to students and adult learners worldwide.
Ernesto Zedillo’s new Center has begun publishing an on-line journal YaleGlobal. He will explain its exciting scholarly possibilities, and the brochure you have received suggests its potential for reinforcing to a worldwide audience that Yale is the place to turn for insights about international affairs.
The Yale World Fellows Program
Before closing, let me describe one last program that defies simple classification because it is at once a new teaching program involving a new group of international students, and it will also provide a basis for new international collaborations and reaching new audiences. I refer to the new Yale World Fellows Program, the co-tenant along with the Globalization Center, of Betts House, the splendidly renovated mansion at the top of the Prospect Street hill.
The Program brings 16-20 emerging leaders representing all sectors of society and all regions of the world to campus for studying global problems under the tutelage of our most distinguished professors. The program encourages the Fellows to broaden their horizons, and develop new skills and contacts that will serve them and their countries upon their return home. We envision regular reunions of all the Fellows, which we hope will create a network of world leaders who can draw upon one another’s strengths as their careers develop and who will stay connected to Yale.
This past fall, we had a remarkable first cohort that included the Dean of a Chinese law school, the Economic Advisor to the President of Ecuador, a leading journalist from Cameroon, a micro-lender from Pakistan, and a central banker from the Kyrgyz Republic. Next year we want a representative from France, and Linda Lorimer will be enlisting your assistance to identify one.
* * * * *
In closing, I hope that I have given you reason to reflect upon the impact of globalization on teaching and research, the students we educate on campus, the collaborations we form, and the external audiences we will come to embrace. You can help. You can be our ambassadors, by spreading the word about our liberal financial aid policies, by nominating emerging leaders for the World Fellows program, by convincing friends and associates that Yale is committed to its international agenda. With your help, as we begin our fourth century, we will rise to the challenge of becoming a global university.
 