 To the Members of the Yale Community:
As students return from spring break we find the nation at war. Our thoughts turn first to those most immediately affected - to those in combat, their families, and the millions who share with us the hope that the war will be swiftly concluded with minimal loss of life and lasting peace.
Much controversy has surrounded the initiation of this war, and members of our community hold widely differing views about the legitimacy and prudence of U.S. intervention. In an environment of civility, where we respect and listen carefully to one another, controversy stimulates learning. We need to leave ample space for free expression and bring the tools of reason and analysis to bear on the arguments we hear. In the weeks to come, let us, as a university community, continue to model the free, open, and tolerant society that the United States at its best represents. And let us also learn from this experience of war, through reflection and conversation.
War understandably produces anxiety in us all. Although we have no knowledge of any threat to the security of our campus, we will continue to take all necessary precautions to insure the safety of students, faculty, and staff. Should any emergency arise, we have the capacity to notify the community swiftly and comprehensively.
War is traumatic. It is not unusual to experience anxieties and concerns at such a time. After September 11, 2001, and most recently after the tragic auto accident in January, this community has shown an extraordinary capacity to come together in support of one another at times of trauma. Once again, I would ask you all to support those who need support, and encourage those who need counseling to seek it from one the many sources that are available.
Our common purpose - the search for light and truth - is a source of strength for us all. As we carry forward the work of the university, let us seek to discover the lessons of the chapter of history that is now being written, and may those lessons help us to shape a better world.
Sincerely,
Richard C. Levin
 