 It is a pleasure to be with you today, and I thank especially those of you who have come from afar to hear about Yale’s efforts to mark its fourth century by becoming a truly global university.
When I became president nearly ten years ago, there were two monumental tasks that cried out for immediate attention. First, the magnificent collection of buildings, many of which were built in the years between the two world wars, had been woefully neglected. A nearly comprehensive renovation of the campus was an imperative simply to provide the most basic support for teaching, research, and residential life. Second, conditions in the city of New Haven, once a relatively prosperous manufacturing town, had deteriorated badly.
Stores in the downtown had closed, industrial jobs had departed to the south or offshore, and many of the city’s neighborhoods were blighted. To attract the best students and faculty from around the world something had to be done.
I am pleased to report that we have made great progress on these two fronts. We have invested over $1.8 billion in the renewal of our campus, with spectacular results. Five residential colleges have been transformed to meet virtually every imaginable recreational and social need of our undergraduates, and the others will be renovated one a year in sequence. The Sterling Library, the Law and Divinity Schools, the Payne Whitney Gymnasium, and our principal classroom buildings have all been dramatically transformed. Likewise, we have invested over $100 million to catalyze the revival of the city of New Haven.
The downtown is now vital and vibrant, with fifteen new restaurants opening in the past year alone, and with old commercial buildings transformed into apartment buildings the streets are safe and lively at night.
Building upon the foundation of Yale’s strength in the biomedical sciences, we have spun off twenty-five regional biotechnology firms in the past decade, seventeen of them located within the city limits. New Haven is becoming a major center for science-based industry.
With the tasks of rebuilding our campus and our city well under way, and with the resources provided by the spectacular growth of our endowment and the extraordinary generosity of our alumni, we entered our fourth century in 2001 prepared to make new investments that would broaden the scope of Yale’s mission and strengthen its contribution to the advancement of knowledge and to human welfare. Two such investments stand out by their magnitude and ambition.
First, by investing $1 billion in science, engineering, and medicine over the next decade, we intend to push Yale into the very top ranks in these fields that are so central to the growth of the modern economy.
To be one of the world’s best universities fifty years from now, it will not be sufficient to excel in the humanities, the fine arts, the social sciences and the law; we will need to be among the very best in science and technology. And so we are moving forward. A $175 million medical research building opened this month, a new environmental science center opened last year, and within the next year we begin construction of new buildings for chemistry and biomedical engineering. And, as we hoped, our well-publicized commitment to upgrading and expanding our science facilities has already enabled us to recruit scientists of a caliber that has raised envious eyebrows at MIT and Stanford.
The second major institutional objective, as we begin our fourth century, is to establish Yale as a thoroughly global university, and it is this effort I wish to sketch for you this evening.
Before I set all this in context, let me begin by noting the specific international initiatives we have undertaken in the last four years:
We have extended need-blind admissions and need-based financial aid to international applicants to Yale College;
We have increased financial aid in the Graduate School so that every admitted student, whether foreign or domestic, has free tuition and a generous annual stipend;
We have created a new Office of International Students and Scholars which offers greatly improved support services as well as visa and immigration counsel;
We have established a new Center for Language Study, which is becoming a national model;
We have tripled the budget of the Yale Center for International and Area Studies and introduced under its auspices new programs in South Asian studies, Agrarian Studies, International Political Economy, and Ethnicity, Race, and Migration;
Thanks to the generosity of Joe Fox ‘38, we have established new graduate student exchange programs with seven leading universities around the world;
We have created three new endowed professorships for distinguished scholars with an interdisciplinary focus on international affairs;
We have established the Center for the Study of Globalization under the leadership of Ernesto Zedillo;
The School of Management has founded the International Institute for Corporate Governance, headed by Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes who is with us here in Korea;
We have inaugurated the Yale World Fellows Program for emerging international leaders;
We have appointed a press officer in the Office of Public Affairs to focus exclusively on promoting Yale in the international media;
We have recently established an Office of International Affairs that will serve as an administrative resource to all schools, departments and centers to welcome international students, scholars, and visitors and maintain connections with them after their Yale experience. The Office will help coordinate, develop, and expand our international collaborations and engage new international audiences; and
We have formed a President’s Council on International Activities to advise me on how best to advance the University’s global agenda. Dr. Park Seong Yawng has been an active participant on the Council.
* * * * * * * * *
Let me step back now and place this all in context. The globalization of the university is in part an evolutionary development. Yale has drawn students from outside the United States for nearly two centuries, and international issues have been represented in its curriculum for the past hundred years and more.
But creating the global university is also a revolutionary development - signaling distinct changes in the substance of teaching and research, the demographic characteristics of students and scholars, the scope and breadth of external collaborations, and the engagement of the university with new audiences.
Let me touch in turn upon each of these four aspects of globalizing the university.
Teaching and Research
When I speak of becoming a global university, I envision a curriculum and a research agenda permeated by awareness that political, economic, social, and cultural phenomena in any part of the world can no longer be fully understood in isolation. The revolution in communications technology has brought the world closer together and changed the way we think about it.
The term “globalization” is much used these days, although we have yet to disentangle entirely its several meanings. In one sense globalization refers to economic interdependence. The movement of capital across national borders is now instantaneous, and the movement of products, people, and, unfortunately, pollution is freer and faster than ever before. These facts make comprehensive governance of the economy impossible at the level of the nation-state. International institutions are needed to regulate trade, capital flows, and environmental degradation. Isolation is not an option.
In another sense globalization refers to the instantaneous transmission of ideas and images. Cross-cultural influences have always been with us, but today they are more powerful because of their immediacy. Because we access the same web sites, radio and television broadcasts, many fear a growing homogenization of cultures and values.
The incipiency of a common “global” culture has precipitated, in many parts of the world, a defensive reaction to protect “local” values, heightening tensions among neighboring ethnic, religious, and cultural groups.
Yale is well prepared to meet the challenge of understanding these developments. We offer over 600 courses on international topics, and the Yale Center for International and Area Studies sponsors programs of teaching and research focused on each of the world’s major regions. We teach 52 languages, and through the new Center for Language Study we are serving better those students whose primary interest is to develop fluency in speaking, rather than to master the classics of a national literature. We have recently expanded our offerings in Korean and now offer intermediate and advanced courses in addition to elementary Korean.
With us this evening is John Treat, a distinguished professor and director of graduate studies in East Asian Languages and Literature, and a member of the Council on East Asian Studies at Yale.
Professor Treat recently played an instrumental role in securing a new grant from the United States Department of Education to help fund the expansion of Korea studies at Yale.
A global university can be built upon this strong foundation, but the superstructure must encompass new forms as well as old. Because the world’s problems cannot be neatly compartmentalized into traditional academic categories, we have seen a flowering of interdisciplinary programs, such as the Center for Law and Environmental Policy, the International Institute for Corporate Governance, and the Center for Interdisciplinary Research on HIV/AIDS, as well as the Center for the Study of Globalization.
Students and Scholars
Just as building a global university requires us to expand our curriculum and re-focus our research, it also requires us to ask whom are we educating and for what purpose?
A record number of 1,775 international students from 101 different countries are enrolled in Yale academic programs this year; in other words, over 16% of the University-wide student body this year is neither a U.S. citizen nor a permanent resident.
In both the Graduate School and the Yale School of Management, over one-third of our students come from abroad, and the Forestry and Environment and Music Schools are close behind. The last decade has seen an overall increase of more than 25% in the number of international students. Yale currently has 157 students from Korea, a total exceeded only by China and Canada.
Yale has an impressive number of distinguished alumni in Korea. We are proud that our graduates can be found across the spectrum of government, business, science and academia. Two Yale graduates have served as prime minister of Korea and several have served in other prestigious government positions.
Yale is well represented in academia with numerous professors and scientists. Prominent Yale graduates are also captains of business and industry including our distinguished host tonight, chairman of the Kumho Group and devoted Yale Club president, Dr. PARK Seong Yawng.
Even with our strong ties in Korea, Yale College has historically had a very small complement of international students. When I became President, only one out of 50 students in the College was neither U.S. nor Canadian. Now it is one in thirteen, which ensures that most U.S. citizens in the College now have international students among their closest friends.
As the numbers of international students in Yale College rise, their composition is changing - in large part because of the decision to admit international students to Yale College on exactly the same basis as we admit U.S. citizens. That is, we admit students without regard to their ability to pay and offer the full financial assistance that they need to attend. This new policy is having a profound effect on our ability to attract undergraduates from many countries around the world.
Not only are we providing generous financial aid for full-time students in residence at Yale, but we also are increasing the resources available for overseas study and exchange visits. To coordinate these resources we recently established the Office of International Education and Fellowship Programs. One of our most prestigious study abroad programs, The Richard U. Light Fellowship at Yale, provides full funding - travel, tuition, room and board and incidentals - to Yale students of exceptional promise for language study in East Asia. Since its inauguration in 1996, 20 students have received Light Fellowships for study in Korea.
And it is not only international students who are changing the face of Yale, but also the visiting international scholars who come to campus to assume research and teaching responsibilities, to collaborate with colleagues or to observe in laboratory, classroom or clinical settings. Their numbers have more than doubled in a decade. We have over 1550 international scholars on campus this year, 65 of who are Korean.
International Collaborations
I have discussed how the creation of a global university will affect on-campus teaching and research, as well as the number and type of students we educate. But an equally powerful impetus for change will come from increased opportunities to collaborate with other institutions.
Let me offer two very different examples; both involve a sustained commitment with another institution.
Let me tell you about this year’s recipient of the Kumho award for the most outstanding contribution to plant biology, Professor Deng Xing-Wang, the Eaton Professor of Botany at Yale. I want you to picture walking with him - not on our campus, but on the campus of Peking University. You will see today a building with exterior signage that reads the “Yale-Peking Joint Center for Plant Molecular Genetics and Agricultural Biotechnology.” Here Professor Deng, along with Yale and Chinese collaborators, are using genetic technologies to increase crop production. Scientists from the Center come regularly to New Haven to build on the collaboration. My second example of collaboration is one that is being created this spring. Yale’s Dean of Public Health, Michael Merson and a number of his colleagues have been working with the faculty of Putin’s alma mater in St. Petersburg to shape the curriculum for what will be Russia’s first school of public health.
New Audiences
The same advances in communications technology that have created the phenomenon we call globalization offer substantial opportunities for the global university to expand its educational mission. The Yale web site already contains many audio and video reproductions of lectures and conferences that have taken place on our campus, but we have only begun to tap the potential of the Internet to provide valuable on-line learning experiences for students around the world.
To this end, Yale has joined with Oxford and Stanford Universities in an alliance to develop on-line educational materials. Our joint venture is called AllLearn.org and is found under that name on the Web. Some of our offerings approximate conventional university “course” in the arts and sciences, but we are also experimenting with offerings of different duration and format. Last fall we had 50 courses available, and we now are making our on-line curriculum available to students and adult learners worldwide.
Last fall, the Center for the Study of Globalization began publishing an on-line journal - YaleGlobal. The journal’s web site now has nearly 20,000 visitors a day, and many of its articles have been reprinted in major international publications, such as The International Herald Tribune and The Financial Times.
The International Institute for Corporate Governance headed by Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes is reaching out to practitioners in the private and public sector across the globe who face the challenge of reforming corporate governance frameworks and practices.
The Institute promotes the exchange of ideas and experience, reports the results of research on best practices internationally and interacts with academic institutions throughout the world. Today I addressed the Institute’s conference here in Seoul, which is bringing together scholars and practitioners from the United Sates, Korea, and other Asian countries.
The Yale World Fellows Program
Before closing, let me describe one last program that defies simple classification because it is at once a new teaching program involving a new group of international students, and it will also provide a basis for new international collaborations and reaching new audiences. I refer to the new Yale World Fellows Program, which, along with the Globalization Center, occupies Betts House, the splendidly renovated mansion at the top of Prospect Street hill.
The Program brings 16-20 emerging leaders representing all sectors of society and all regions of the world to campus to study global problems under the tutelage of our most distinguished professors. The program encourages the Fellows to broaden their horizons, and develop new skills and contacts that will serve them and their countries upon their return home. We envision regular reunions of all the Fellows, which we hope will create a network of world leaders who can draw upon one another’s strengths as their careers develop and who will stay connected to Yale.
Next fall, the World Fellows will include top political advisors to British Primer Minister Tony Blair and Mexican President Vicente Fox, two African members of parliament, and an Australian Internet entrepreneur. We invite you to nominate candidates so that there can be a representative from Korea in the class of 2004.
* * * * * * * * *
In closing, I hope that I have given you reason to reflect upon the impact of globalization on teaching and research, the students we educate on campus, the collaborations we form, and the external audiences we will come to embrace. You can help. You can be our ambassadors, by spreading the word about our liberal financial aid policies, by nominating emerging leaders for the World Fellows Program, by convincing friends and associates that Yale is committed to its international agenda. With your help, as we begin our fourth century, we will rise to the challenge of becoming a global university.
 