 In 1826, David Hudson founded a school in what had been known as the Western Reserve of Connecticut. He brought to the task the ideas and ambitions of the Connecticut institution he took as his model. For even in those early years of the Republic, Yale aspired to become something more than the collegiate school founded in 1701 to educate young Puritans for “service in Church and Civil State.” Under the leadership of Timothy Dwight, Yale had begun the transition from college to university - opening a medical school and appointing the nation’s first professor of natural science and its first professor of law. In the wake of these developments, the “Yale of the West” was established in the state of Ohio.
Today, I am honored to have the opportunity to bring to Cleveland some of the new ideas and ambitions of Case Western’s mother institution, as you formally charge a Yale graduate with the responsibility of leadership. I bring sincere congratulations to Ed Hundert and warm greetings to Mayor Jane Campbell.
I am delighted that President Hundert chose to devote this day of his inauguration to a discussion of how universities can contribute to the advancement of their host cities. From the late nineteenth century through the mid-twentieth, industrial firms, financial institutions, and public utilities were typically the largest employers in most of our cities. In recent decades, however, as manufacturing jobs migrated out of cities and as banks and public utilities consolidated, universities and their associated medical centers have grown to become the largest employers in a surprising number of our cities. I am not talking simply of New Haven, Cambridge, Columbus, Ann Arbor, and Bloomington; I am referring also to Philadelphia, Boston, San Francisco, and Birmingham, Alabama.
With the increased local prominence of universities comes increased responsibility. As President Hundert has recognized in recent speeches, a large university contributes to the wider community’s well-being by its very presence - by attracting external research funding and creating jobs, by purchasing locally-provided goods and services, by bringing to the community highly educated citizens who tend to care about, and contribute to, the quality of the city’s schools and cultural life. But, as President Hundert has noted, these passive contributions are not enough. By adopting active strategies for civic improvement, by becoming engaged institutional citizens, we can make a major difference in the quality of urban life. Such engagement is consistent with the goals of institutions that have for centuries educated students for public service. It also benefits universities to the extent that an improved quality of urban life helps to attract the best students and faculty from around the world.
My task this morning is to relate to you the story of Yale’s partnership with the city of New Haven. Over the past decade this partnership has contributed substantially to the renaissance of a city that was suffering from the absence of industrial investment and job creation, a partially-abandoned downtown, blighted neighborhoods, and an unflattering external image. In the two years before I became president, a student was murdered on our campus and a major national magazine conveyed the impression that violent teen-age drug gangs ruled the streets. By contrast, last year, a feature article in the New York Times travel section called New Haven “an irresistible destination.”
Outsiders have long regarded the presence of Yale as one of the city’s major assets, but, except for episodic engagement, the University’s contributions to the community did not derive from an active, conscious strategy of urban citizenship. It is true that our students, for more than a century, have played a highly constructive role as volunteers. Even a decade ago, two thousand students volunteered regularly in schools, community centers, churches, soup kitchens, and homeless shelters, but these volunteer efforts were neither coordinated nor well supported institutionally. When I became president in 1993, there was much to be done to transform Yale into an active, contributing institutional citizen.
So much, in fact, that I decided that we needed to develop a comprehensive strategy for civic engagement, create administrative infrastructure to support the strategy, and make a substantial, long-term commitment to its implementation. I started by recruiting leadership, and I was fortunate to have near at hand the perfect entrepreneur to jump-start our efforts. Linda Lorimer had served Yale in several administrative positions prior to leaving in 1987 to become President of Randolph-Macon Women’s College. While serving there, she was elected to the Yale Corporation, our governing body, and thus she remained intimately familiar with the University. She agreed to resign her position on the Corporation, return to Yale as Vice President and Secretary, and work with me to develop a comprehensive strategy for urban partnership.
We began by taking an inventory of the extensive volunteer effort already undertaken by more than one hundred groups around the campus. By compiling and publishing this information we hoped to make the city more aware of Yale’s involvement, but also to understand for ourselves where we already had a foundation upon which trust could be built and collaboration expanded. In a city with only one wealthy institution, and one that historically had been indifferent to local conditions, we had generations of distrust to overcome.
Within weeks of taking office in 1993, Linda Lorimer and I, along with two outstanding assistants - Michael Morand and Cynthia Farrar - were hard at work talking with and listening to our neighbors -the newly elected Mayor, John DeStefano, members of the Board of Aldermen, leaders of the business community and clergy, the school superintendent, principals, and leaders of neighborhood organizations. We have kept these channels of communication open ever since, maintaining the spirit and practice of honest and open dialogue, which is essential to enduring partnership.
From these early conversations and our survey of campus resources and existing interventions, we developed a strategic framework that we believed most appropriate given the particular needs of New Haven and the particular capabilities of our university. Other city-university partnerships will develop different priorities, but an overarching strategy is necessary to ensure that efforts are not dissipated.
In New Haven, we determined that we could make a constructive contribution in four areas that cried out for attention. These have remained our areas of focus throughout the past decade.
The first area of focus was economic development. We had considerable faculty strength in the biomedical sciences, but no track record of encouragement or support for the transfer of technology to local businesses.
The second priority was strengthening neighborhoods. Here we believed that increasing the rate of home ownership could improve the stability of neighborhoods and the commitment of residents, and that the university, with 10,000 employees, had the leverage to help. We also believed that as an educational institution, we had human resources that could assist the work of the public schools.
The third area of focus was to increase the safety, appearance, and vitality of our downtown. We believed that this would greatly improve perceptions of the city and also directly benefit the university community, since we are located in the heart of downtown New Haven.
Finally, we focused on the image of the city, recognizing that improvement in its physical and material conditions was not in itself enough to change perceptions of the outside world. We needed to communicate as well.
At the beginning we recognized that most enduring contributions to the improvement of New Haven would require partnership with our neighbors, but these would take time to develop. To signal emphatically to both the university community and the city the seriousness of our commitment, we took three important unilateral steps during the first year of my tenure. First, to provide appropriate support for the implementation of our strategies, we established an Office of New Haven and State Affairs. Second, to demonstrate institutional endorsement of the prodigious volunteer efforts of our students, we established a program of paid summer internships to support the work of students in city agencies and nonprofit service organizations. The President’s Public Service Fellowship attracts hundreds of applications every year for about 45 positions. Third, to stimulate immediately the process of strengthening neighborhoods, we announced what has become the most visible and successful of our urban initiatives: the Yale Homebuyer Program.
The Homebuyer program offers all Yale employees a substantial subsidy for purchasing a home in New Haven, where housing prices had been in decline for five or six years and there was a high vacancy rate even in the nicest neighborhoods. The subsidy was initially $2,000 per year for ten years. From April 1994 through December 1995, we offered the subsidy to our employees for a home purchase anywhere within the city limits. By the end of 1995, nearly 200 employees had participated, and in the city’s two upper-middle class neighborhoods prices had completely stabilized and vacancies had disappeared. At this point, we removed the subsidy from the high income neighborhoods, focused on the lower income neighborhoods surrounding the university, and increased the subsidy to $7,000 on closing and $2,000 per year for each of the next nine years. To date, more than 530 employees have purchased homes under the program. Over the last seven years, 80% of the participants were first time homebuyers and 55% were members of minority groups.
The Homebuyer program is an expensive proposition. We have committed over $12 million to date and the annual cost of the program exceeds $1 million. Not every institution can afford an investment of this magnitude, but many employers can create programs tailored to their resources and the needs of their communities. Two other New Haven nonprofits - the Hospital of St. Raphael and the Mary Wade Nursing Home - now provide a one-time $5,000 cash incentive for home purchases, and the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Southern California have developed programs appropriate to their local circumstances.
Before discussing in some detail the four main elements of our strategy, I have two observations about leadership. As a strategy unfolds, the skills needed for effective leadership may change. We recognized this after about three years. Linda Lorimer was an ideal start-up entrepreneur. She built bridges to every local constituency, developed an effective staff, and initiated scores of collaborative projects with neighborhood organizations and downtown leaders. By 1996, however, as our efforts to generate start-up companies were just beginning to show signs of life and when a large parcel of downtown real estate became available, it was clear to us that we needed an experienced urban developer on the team. Serendipitously, it was just at this moment that Bruce Alexander, an active Yale alumnus who developed Baltimore’s Inner Harbor and New York’s South Street Seaport, took early retirement from the Rouse Company. Our initial effort to recruit him for full-time service failed, but he agreed to come to New Haven on a volunteer basis a few days each month to help us with our very complicated negotiations to acquire the major downtown parcel. After a year and a half of volunteer service, he was hooked. Linda Lorimer moved on to other important assignments and Bruce became Yale’s first Vice President for New Haven and State Affairs.
One more thought on the subject of leadership. In recruiting new deans as well as directors of major enterprises, I have made community outreach an explicit goal and a criterion against which performance is measured. The consequence is that our museums, the library, the athletics department, and every one of our ten professional schools has an expanded program of outreach.
Let me now take a few moments to sketch what we have been able to accomplish in each of the priority areas we first identified a decade ago: economic development, neighborhood improvement, downtown revitalization, and improving the city’s image.
In many communities around the country, the scientific research undertaken by universities has been a powerful engine of local economic development. Without critical mass in electrical engineering and computer science, Yale - and consequently New Haven - missed out on the technological revolution that spurred the development of Silicon Valley and Boston’s Route 128. But Yale has impressive strength in biomedical sciences, and thus in 1993 we had tremendous unexploited potential to build a biotechnology industry in and around New Haven.
In prior years, however, the University had taken a relatively passive attitude toward the commercialization of its science and technology. Again, leadership was the answer. We recruited Greg Gardiner, a senior technology executive at a major pharmaceutical company, and provided him with the resources to recruit a very able staff, including Jon Soderstrom, who later became his successor. Within two years, our Office of Cooperative Research was transformed from a relative laggard to a national example of best practice in the area of technology transfer. We sought out faculty with an interest in commercializing their results, used students at the School of Management to prepare business plans, drew upon Yale’s extensive connections in the venture capital business to find financing, and helped to find real estate solutions in New Haven. The results have been impressive. Twenty-five new biotechnology companies have been established in the greater New Haven area, seventeen within the city limits. These firms have attracted over $1.5 billion in capital and together they now employ 1300 people. Since most of the companies have substantial funding, they have weathered the recession and are focused on a longer-term horizon.
One of the major constraints in the initial years of this economic development effort was real estate. We worked closely with state and city officials to revive a long moribund Science Park at the factory location abandoned two decades ago by the Olin Corporation. Once the initial, publicly funded facilities had been fully leased, and it was clear that Yale was continuing to generate two or three new companies each year, private capital moved in to develop one million square feet of new space.
The development of a strong biotechnology industry in and around New Haven augurs well for the long term, but it does little to address the immediate needs of the inner city neighborhoods that surround our campus. To build trust and credibility, it was essential to establish working partnerships with grassroots organizations and community leaders. Neighborhood partnerships also provide an opportunity to coordinate and focus on a common purpose the enormous talent and energy of our student volunteers.
We chose first to work in the Dwight neighborhood, to the west of our campus, where, for several blocks, both students and community residents live side by side in low-rise apartments and multifamily houses. Beyond the transition area, the neighborhood becomes more homogeneous, a traditional inner city neighborhood, but with an excellent housing stock and the potential for improvement.
With a representative of our Office of New Haven Affairs serving as a crucial liaison, we mobilized faculty and students from the schools of architecture, law, and management to help neighborhood residents develop a comprehensive plan for neighborhood revitalization. We sought and won a sizeable federal grant to allow implementation of this resident-led plan that supports job training, housing improvements, and the neighborhood elementary school. With the assistance of our Law School’s clinical program and another federal grant, a new community development corporation was formed. Among the results of our collaborative efforts in the Dwight neighborhood are an addition to the elementary school designed by Yale architecture students, an extensive literacy program staffed by undergraduate volunteers, community gardens planted with the assistance of Forestry School students, improvisational children’s theater programs mounted by Drama School students, and the first new urban supermarket in the state of Connecticut in a generation - an effort facilitated by the work of Management school students.
We are also working extensively in the Dixwell neighborhood northwest of campus, where we have rehabilitated a substantial number of residential properties that we lease to graduate students. These investments set in a motion a process that has encouraged other neighbors - including participants in our Homebuyer program - to invest in the upgrading of their own homes. Recently, Michael Morand has worked closely with Dixwell community residents on plans to develop a large vacant site that sits directly between the university and a new, very successful low-rise public housing project developed under a HOPE VI grant. We will use a portion of this site for a new headquarters for the University Police, which will provide safety and security to those nearby, and we will incorporate in the new facility a community center, with a computer cluster for school children and a meeting room for community organizations.
Complementing our neighborhood efforts are some very substantial public school collaborations. At the Hill Regional Career High Schools over 200 students participate in eight science courses taught by members of our medical and nursing school faculties, and 65 students live on campus during the summer to study science and work in laboratories. At the Cooperative Arts and Humanities Magnet High School, students from our School of Music play an active role in the instructional program. We also take pride in the twenty-five year old Yale New Haven Teachers Institute, an innovative program now being disseminated nationwide, where professors work during the summer with public school teachers as partners in curriculum development.
As a final component of our neighborhood outreach, we have endeavored to make our campus more accessible to local school children. In addition to opening our museums to school visits, which has been the practice for generations, we now make our extensive athletic facilities available to hundreds of children enrolled in the National Youth Sports Program during the summer, and we host a citywide science fair each year.
Bruce Alexander will describe our downtown revitalization efforts in detail at one of the breakout sessions that follows these remarks, but let me sketch them briefly.
Over the last decade we have made major investments to develop the downtown retail districts. To the immediate west of campus, there is a student-oriented retail strip on Broadway. We worked with the city to improve the streetscape and pedestrian amenities. We assembled the key properties, renovated them, and recruited an attractive mix of national and mostly local retailers. We have maintained high standards for facades and signage, required our tenants to remain open during the evenings, to give life to the street, and supported the development of local, minority-owned businesses. When I first recruited Bruce Alexander he asked me was there any store in particular that I wanted for Broadway. As a father of four, I replied “J. Crew.” Bruce went to J. Crew and they announced promptly that they had no interest in New Haven. Five years later, J. Crew opened on Broadway. A recently hired faculty member who attended Yale College and then went to graduate school at a rival institution, told me upon his return to New Haven: “It’s not even a close call. Broadway today is much better than Harvard Square!”
We have also worked to redevelop the central business district to the south of campus - the Chapel/College Street district. Early on, we helped at the Mayor’s request to organize downtown property owners into a special service district, paying extra taxes for increased city services - cleaner streets, better lighting, more policing. Then, as I mentioned, a large, centrally located group of properties became available in the mid-1990s. The Mayor came to us with the request that the district be owned and managed as a unit, either by us or by a developer we helped to locate. We took on the challenge, invested in the upgrade of fourteen individual properties with retail on the ground floor and residential space above. Now the revival of the downtown is well under way, and private capital is flowing in to renovate retail space for new restaurants and to convert abandoned or under-occupied commercial buildings to residential apartments. Today, much of the central business district is a twenty-four hour community with safe streets, and many new restaurants, clubs, and retailers.
Finally, I turn to the question of New Haven’s image. The city has long been a center for arts and culture, but for most of the region and the nation this has been a well-kept secret. In fact there is no other city of New Haven’s size in the Western Hemisphere that can match its array of two major repertory theaters, three symphony orchestras, two world-class art museums, and a major natural history museum. Now that the downtown has been revitalized, marketing New Haven has become a major community priority. About eight years ago, thanks to the efforts of two indomitable women of our community and with the support of the city, the University, and the Southern New England Telephone Company, we inaugurated an annual summer Festival of Arts and Ideas. This has become a major regional event, drawing organizations like the Royal Shakespeare Company and the Metropolitan Opera to New Haven. Thirty thousand people attended the Met’s performance on the town green last summer. To publicize the Festival, the supporting program of summer concerts sponsored by the city, and the other cultural attractions of New Haven, we worked with the Mayor to fund a major regional marketing campaign. It is bearing fruit. I quote this year’s Lonely Planet Guide to New England: “Bravo, New Haven. Much maligned for decades as a stagnant urban seaport, this city of 123,000 souls has risen from its own ashes to become an arts mecca. The city’s center is a tranquil core: the New Haven Green, decorated with graceful colonial churches and venerable Yale University. Scores of ethnic restaurants, theaters, museums, pubs, and clubs dot the neighborhood.”
Successful collaborations require willing partners. We have worked hard to win the trust and confidence of community organizations and their leaders. This was not easy, because we had decades of bad feeling and resentment to overcome. It was not easy for New Haven’s elected leaders to embrace the University. Yale-bashing had long been a winning political strategy. We were especially fortunate to initiate our efforts just as John DeStefano was elected as the Mayor of New Haven. He has courageously made the leap of faith toward partnership with us. We don’t always see eye to eye; we have had some public disagreements and even more private disagreements. But the Mayor has recognized the enormous potential of mobilizing the University in support of civic objectives. Without his leadership our efforts would have fallen short.
We have learned many lessons over the past decade. Here are some of the things that I believe a university must do to have a substantial impact on its local community:

Urban partnership must be a clearly articulated institutional goal and widely understood to be a Presidential priority.
Recruit outstanding leadership and provide administrative resources sufficient for the tasks to be undertaken.
Understand the University’s existing points of contact with the community.
Develop and maintain honest and open channels of communication with all urban constituencies.
Formulate a comprehensive strategy of engagement, tailored to match the universities capabilities to the city’s needs.
Encourage investment by state and local government through a willingness to co-invest.
Share credit with elected officials and community leaders.
Have patience. Elected officials and neighborhood groups will sometimes need to distance themselves and demonstrate their independence. Give your partners room.

Universities are uniquely poised to strengthen urban America. As large employers seeking to attract students and faculty from afar, we have compelling practical reasons to do so. But our efforts also flow naturally from our mission and purpose. On our campuses we are devoted to the full development of human potential, and we provide extraordinary resources to facilitate such development in our students and faculty. Outside our walls, many of our neighbors lack the opportunity to flourish. To the extent that we can help those without privilege access such opportunity, we will help to insure the health of our democracy. Our responsibility transcends pragmatism. We must help our cities become what we aspire to be on our campuses - a place where human potential can be fully realized.
 