 It is a great honor to return to this distinguished university where I was welcomed so warmly in 2001 when I visited as part of Yale’s 300th anniversary celebration. It is an even greater honor to be welcomed into the Peking University academic family and to join the ranks of your graduates who have been such important contributors to your country and who figure so prominently in the affairs of China.
As an honorary graduate, I can now join your students in taking pride in the record of achievement of this institution: you count 400 members of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and the Chinese Academy of Engineering among your alumni and faculty. And, of course, President Xu’s work in the field of plant physiology has been celebrated around the world. He and I share a common satisfaction in leading universities where we ourselves were fortunate to study.
Every sector of Chinese society benefits from the contribution of Beida graduates, and we at Yale also benefit from the superior education that you provide to your students. We are fortunate to have your scores of your alumni on our campus as graduate students, research associates, and faculty members. Your graduates enrich the academic life of our community and help us realize Yale’s goal of becoming a truly global university. Seventeen per cent of Yale students come from outside the United States, and students and scholars from China represent our largest contingent from any foreign country. It is my hope that many students in this audience will consider coming to Yale to pursue advanced study or post-doctoral research and add to the number of those affiliated with both Yale and Beida.
I am deeply grateful for the honor you bestow upon me today, and I realize that the honor belongs not to me as an individual, but as a representative of the venerable institution that I serve.
Yale appointed the first science professor in North America, and it was the first American institution to grant the degree of Doctor of Medicine, the first to establish a program in public health, the first to establish a University-based School of Nursing. We were the first American university to establish a School of Forestry, and the first, nearly a century later, to appoint a professor of industrial ecology. Yale was the first American university to establish an art gallery, the first to establish a school of Fine Art, the first to establish a School of Drama. We were the first American university to create a department devoted exclusively to graduate students, and the first to grant the Ph.D. degree. We were the first to award a bachelor’s degree to a native of China, the first to grant a graduate degree to a native of Japan, the first to award a Ph.D. to an African-American.
Yale scientists discovered the laws of thermodynamics and the function of RNA, developed the influenza vaccine and the first interferon treatment for cancer. Yale scholars were among the pioneers of the modern study of ancient Near Eastern languages and civilizations, linguistics, and comparative literature, and for the past half-century our literature departments have been at the forefront in developing a series of reigning paradigms of literary criticism. Yale scholars established the field of sociology in America, brought mathematics into the study of economics, and forged the modern theory of democracy.
Commitment to public service is one of Yale’s oldest traditions. Four of the last six Presidents of the United States are Yale graduates, 533 Yale graduates have served in the United States Congress, and there have been 55 cabinet secretaries and 18 Supreme Court justices who hold Yale degrees. Today, the tradition of public service extends around the globe. Yale graduates have served as President or Prime Minister of Burma, Korea, Mexico, and West Germany, and Yale graduates currently hold positions ranging from the Foreign Minister of Japan to the Vice President of the Supreme People’s Court of China.
We are especially proud that Yale educated the first native of China to study in the United States. Yung Wing and the students that followed him more than a century ago returned to help strengthen and modernize China. Today, more than 600 Chinese students and scholars are in residence at Yale, and it is our profound hope that they, too, will make an important contribution to China’s future.
The greatness of an institution of higher learning ultimately derives from the work of its faculty, who strive daily to advance the frontiers of knowledge and transmit the fruits of their study to the next generation. In creating this Yale Day at Beida you acknowledge this truth, and, therefore, I would like to introduce my faculty colleagues who are here with me today. This afternoon, you will have an opportunity to hear from each of them. Each is a distinguished member of our faculty, and each is engaged in collaborations here in China that exemplify the power and the potential of partnerships between great global universities.
The first is your own graduate Deng Xing-Wang, the Eaton Professor of Plant Biology at Yale, who received both his bachelor and master degrees from Peking University. Earlier this year Professor Deng was awarded the Kumho Science International Award in Seoul for outstanding research in plant biology. Yale and Bei-da share pride in his scholarly accomplishments. But today, I note especially his leadership in providing a model for our future collaborations: Professor Deng is the Director of Peking-Yale Center for Plant Molecular Genetics and Agro-biotechnology located on this campus. We all understand the importance of finding ways to feed the world’s growing population. Here at Peking University your faculty along with Professor Deng and others from Yale are collaborating on this essential work in the service all mankind - while simultaneously bringing our institutions closer together.
A possible example of future cooperation is represented by my second colleague, William Goetzman, the Edwin J. Beinecke Professor of Finance at the Yale School of Management and Director of the International Center for Finance. He is conducting a far-reaching study of China’s stock markets in the years 1870s to 1930s. This work is likely to offer important insights into the current efforts to develop China’s capital markets. The opportunity remains for our two universities to determine how we can collaborate more closely to advance this work. This project might offer the basis for more extensive partnerships between Peking University and Yale’s School of Management, which in the last year was ranked one of the top 10 business schools in the world by the Wall Street Journal, the Financial Times, Forbes Magazine and The Economist.
My next colleague, Paul Gewirtz, is the Potter Stewart Professor of Law at the Yale Law School, which is universally regarded as the number one school for legal study in the United States. Professor Gewirtz also represents Yale’s global aspirations and the centrality of China to our institutional strategy. He is the Director of Yale’s China Law Center. The Center was established in 1999 after Professor Gewirtz returned to Yale from serving in the administration of President Bill Clinton, whom he assisted developing the U.S.-China Legal Cooperation Initiative that Presidents Clinton and Jiang launched at their 1997 Summit meeting. Although the China Law Center has been in existence for only four years, it is already deeply involved in cooperative projects with leading Chinese legal experts in the areas of judicial reform, criminal law, administrative law, regulatory reform, and legal education. The Center’s activities combine practical, on-the-ground legal reform projects with research and education in a mutually reinforcing way.
Professor Gewirtz and I had dinner on Wednesday evening with the President of the Supreme Court, Xiao Yang, who underscored the need for continuing exchanges among academic leaders, lawyers, and government officials in the U.S. and China to share their thoughts and expertise about the rule of law for the years ahead. The faculty leaders of Beida will be among those involved. Professor Gewirtz and his colleagues are already working closely with more than half a dozen scholars at Beida on a wide array of issues related to legal reforms, including public participation in government decision-making, improved procedures in criminal cases, the development of property rights, and constitutional law. They look forward to expanding this cooperative work in the future.
In introducing my colleagues, I have saved for last those who are representative of Yale’s most ancient and enduring area of excellence - the humanities. In an era in which Yale has committed $1 billion to investments in science, engineering and medicine, and where so many of Yale’s professional schools are ranked as leaders in our nation, it would be easy for others to overlook the continuing centrality of humanistic study at Yale and it significance for universities and the world.
I was impressed when your Vice Minister of Education Zhang Xinsheng who visited Yale last summer stated his belief - which we share - that humanistic inquiry is fundamental to society’s advancement.
I am pleased to introduce three of my colleagues who represent the humanities at Yale. Charles Laughlin, Associate Professor of Chinese Literature in our East Asian Languages and Literatures Department, is currently in residence all year at the Academy of Social Sciences’ Institute for Literary Studies researching modern Chinese essayists. He is exploring the conspicuous connections of these moderns to traditional Chinese cultural sensibilities. Just last month he delivered a paper in Chinese on “Beijing School” essayists at a conference on “Urban Imagination and Cultural Memory” co-organized by Professor Chen Pingyuan in your Chinese Department. As a leader of Yale’s Council of East Asian Studies, Professor Laughlin will be well positioned after he returns to Yale to share insights about future scholarly collaborations.
Professor Laughlin has also been instrumental in encouraging our students to follow his example and study in China. He is the Director of the Richard U. Light Fellowship Program, which supports approximately 60 students or recent graduates each year to spend up to a year studying Asian Languages in Asia. In the last 7 years, the Light Fellowship Program has sent 165 Yale students to China. This program helps to meet our country’s need to educate a cohort of leaders who are fluent in Chinese and who have had the defining experience of living in - and not simply visiting - your country.
I am honored to introduce Annping Chin, a Yale scholar who concentrates on Chinese intellectual history. She is working with Chinese colleagues to study the recently excavated texts, dating back to 300 B.C. from the state of Chu. These texts contain conversations between Confucius and his disciples. Like many scholars in the West, she is deeply indebted to the work of your faculty, in particular the scholarship of Professor Qiu Xi Gui and Professor Li Ling. Professor Qiu and Professor Li’s textual analysis of bamboo and silk manuscripts is the foundation of current research in early Chinese history; and their scholarly integrity and attention to evidence inspire China scholars everywhere in the world. I believe that their work has been central to at least two international conferences at Peking University, and we are hope that they will continue to involve Yale and other U.S. scholars in the effort to interpret the early history of China.
My final introduction is of a scholar who has made fundamental and enduring contributions to the world’s understanding of your country. For the last forty-four years, Sterling Professor Jonathan Spence has been exploring Chinese history, reading the sources and drawing them together in writings that are splendidly accessible to a wide range of readers. Professor Spence is also one of Yale’s most popular teachers. His course on Modern China regularly draws several hundred Yale students to the study of Chinese history and culture. He has written a dozen books on the history of China between the sixteenth and the late twentieth century. The acknowledgements and bibliographies of these studies show how his efforts have built upon the research of Chinese historians at Peking University and elsewhere.
Each of my six colleagues who are participating in today’s events exemplifies individually how U.S. scholars at leading universities are working with those at Peking and elsewhere in China on scholarly collaborations that can benefit our institutions and the wider world. Collectively they demonstrate the many forms such collaboration can take, from joint scientific research to humanistic scholarship to studies in law and economics with direct implications for reform efforts in China.
I hope that our visit today will build upon the foundations they have established to develop a broader and deeper partnership between our institutions. I would encourage the faculty and students here today to participate in these and other initiatives as they develop.
Thank you for honoring me, honoring Yale, and honoring the spirit of partnership that we seek to advance.
 