NAEA International Day
Good morning. It is a great honor to be here with you today. I am grateful for the invitation from The National Academy of Education Administration, and I want to extend a special thanks to Vice President Yu, Vice President Li and Vice President Xue for organizing this event and to Vice Minister Zhang for joining us.

Two years ago, when I visited China, I first outlined my vision for a global university. Today, I want to expand upon that topic and talk about how we can all become global universities. To do this, we need to deepen our collaborations and connections. Together, we can ensure that the students of tomorrow will enjoy the full benefit of growing up in an increasingly interdependent world.

When I first described what it means to be a global university, I emphasized four points: increasing the representation of international students in our institutions, incorporating more international content into our research and teaching, forming collaborative relationships with institutions in other nations, and reaching broader audiences around the world through the use of improved communications technology. I want to focus on two of these attributes today: the movement of students across borders and the formation of collaborative relationships across institutions. I want to suggest that the first leads naturally to the second - that the flow of individual students across borders is the foundation for the formation of more comprehensive partnerships.

Student Exchanges
Twenty-five years ago China resumed the practice of sending students abroad and opened the door to foreigners studying in China. Deng Xiaoping correctly foresaw that this development would help China to modernize its technology and its economy. What he did not emphasize at the time was how the flow of students across borders would also lead to greater mutual understanding. We have developed a deeper appreciation for the distinctive elements in Chinese and western cultures while at the same time recognizing our common humanity and our common interest in working together.

Deng Xiaoping’s far-sighted initiative a quarter century ago calls to mind an earlier day when Yung Wing became the first Chinese to graduate from an American university in 1854. He came for the same reasons: to help modernize China’s technology and economy. We at Yale take great pride in Yung Wing’s choice to make our school his own. And we are proud to have educated the largest number of those who followed Yung Wing under the auspices of the Chinese Educational Mission, including Zhan Tianyou, Yale class of 1881, the engineer who is known as the “Father of China’s railroads.”

At the time of the Chinese Educational Mission, most Yale students came from the northeastern United States. Many of them learned as much from interaction with Chinese students as the Chinese students learned about America. The gains flow in both directions. One learns from study abroad, but one also learns from having international students in one’s home country. Today we believe that every Yale student gains from the presence of the 300 Chinese students currently in residence, just as our faculty benefits from the presence of a comparable number of postdoctoral fellows and visiting scholars. Chinese represent seventeen percent of all the international students and scholars at Yale, and about ten percent of the international students in the United States.

Even as we increase the number of foreign students and scholars at Yale, we are also expanding the opportunities for Yale students to study abroad. Last year, 14 Yale students were enrolled in programs sponsored by Chinese universities. I am confident that these numbers will grow over time.

Just as the educational exchanges of the 1870s and 1880s were beneficial to both China and the United States, the flow of students unleashed by Mr. Deng has had profound effects on both countries. As we have become better informed about one another, our institutions and countries have become stronger. From an American point of view, understanding China and developing relationships with its people and institutions are of great importance. I say this in part because of the size of your population, your significant role in world politics, and the immense potential of your rapidly growing economy. But for a university such as Yale, which aspires to be among the greatest in the world, China is also important for another reason „ the achievements of its ancient and continuous civilization, which is an unending source of learning and enlightenment for scholars who seek comprehensive understanding of the human condition.

From Student Exchanges to Institutional Collaborations
The tens of thousands of Chinese students and scholars who now come to the United States every year constitute the foundation upon which we are now building a deeper and more enduring set of relationships between our countries. I refer now to the development of larger-scale institutional partnerships that will become an increasingly important feature of truly global universities. Today, seventeen Yale departments and schools have established partnerships with forty-five universities, government agencies or independent research institutions in sixteen different cities in China. Yale has twenty-six study sites across China, from Liaoning province in the east, to Xinjiang in the far west, from Beijing in the north, to Hong Kong in the south.

Members of our faculty are engaged with Chinese colleagues in collaborative research projects ranging from studies of the Shanghai stock market to the history of the Qing dynasty archives. They are also engaged in collaborative educational projects, such as one involving the Yale School of Nursing and the Medical School of Central South University, in which Chinese nurses learn how to teach other health care workers to prevent the transmission of blood-borne pathogens.

At Tsinghua University, faculty from the Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Studies are working with colleagues to develop a leadership program in environment and sustainable development. The program will train Chinese mayors, national leaders, corporate executives, and NGO managers who are responsible for urban planning and development. Sponsored by the French company Veiolia Environment, this program is a fine example not only of collaboration between universities, but also of partnership among government, corporations, and universities.

One of our most successful collaborations is the China Law Center, which was launched only three years ago. Today, working closely with the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, NGOs, universities, and the government, the China Law Center is making tremendous strides. Professor Gewirtz and his Chinese and American colleagues have studied and begun to undertake reform in the areas of administrative law, regulation, and legal education.

Most of these institutional collaborations arise, not from top-down directives of university administrators, but rather from longstanding personal relationships among scholars and scientists. For instance, my colleague Xu Tian has been working with counterparts at Fudan University to develop the Fudan-Yale Biomedical Research Center, which will expand on the work of the existing Institute of Developmental Biology and Molecular Medicine. The institute utilizes model organisms to understand the molecular mechanisms of human diseases, including cancer, neuro-degeneration, and hypoxia. Investigators at the institute recently launched a SARS project to search for compounds that convey resistance to coronavirus infection. These research activities involve a continuing exchange of graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and faculty between labs at Fudan and Yale.

How did this fruitful collaboration arise? To begin, Professor Xu has a deep affiliation with both institutions. He did his undergraduate work at Fudan and received his Ph.D. at Yale. But ultimately it comes down to personal relationships. Five of Professor Xu’s collaborators, who are now professors at Fudan, were also trained at Yale. One was Professor Xu’s friend when both were Yale graduate students; another was a visiting scholar in the laboratory of a Yale colleague; one was an exchange student who came to Yale from Fudan and returned to earn his Ph.D. in China, and the other two were postdoctoral fellows in Professor Xu’s Yale lab.

A similar story underlies the formation of the Peking-Yale Joint Center for Plant Genomics and Agricultural Biotechnology. This is a collaborative project involving exchange visits of scientists from Yale and Peking University, who work together to study the basic biology of plant systems with potential relevance to crop improvement in both China and the United States. When Yale Professor Deng Xing-Wang was an undergraduate at Peking University, he came to know Gu Xiaocheng, who was then the chair of the biology department. Professor Deng moved on to graduate study at Yale and eventually joined the faculty. At Yale he encountered a Ph.D. student who was also a graduate of Peking University, Chen Zhangliang. After Chen returned to a professorship and a vice presidency at Peking, he and Professor Deng initiated their collaboration in plant genomics, and with the approval of Professor Gu, the new Center was launched three years ago.

Such collaborations are becoming increasingly common, arising from the dual allegiance of Chinese scientists to their home and foreign institutions and from the personal relationships formed as a consequence of student and faculty exchanges. They are now becoming institutionalized, taking on a depth and permanence beyond that of a personal relationship between two scholars. They will undoubtedly help propel Chinese science to world leadership, and thus prove the wisdom of Deng Xiaoping’s farsighted encouragement of scientific and cultural exchanges.

Yale is by no means alone in fostering institutionalized collaboration. In the United States, Harvard, Cornell, Stanford, and the University of California at Berkeley have a number of cooperative programs throughout China. The Harvard School of Public Health is working with UC Berkeley, Beijing University, Tongji Medical University, and Sichuan University researching the economic effects of smoking on Chinese families. Professors at Cornell University are working with their colleagues at Nanjing Agricultural University on better understanding animal production systems. Professors at Stanford University’s Institute of International Studies and the School of Medicine are working with their colleagues at the China Health Economic Institute to develop ways to improve the quality and efficiency of health care delivery in China. Eight Chinese universities and 12 U.S. universities have established a relationship to undertake research, education, outreach and scholarly projects in the area of agriculture under the auspices of the Consortium of U.S. Universities and Institutions in Cooperation with China for Agriculture.

And U.S. institutions are by no means alone in developing new collaborations. Universities from all over the world are engaged in joint programs with China. Oxford University, for instance, is working with the University of Lanzhou on the sustainability of irrigation agriculture in the Minquin Basin. The University of Tokyo has extensive collaborations with their colleagues throughout China. At Congqiing University, they are involved in engineering programs, at Dalian University of Technology, they are collaborating on industrial science, and at the Beijing College of Forestry, they are engaged in a partnership in agricultural and life sciences. Beijing University of Technology and the University of Science and Technology Beijing have sponsored a symposium in environmental engineering in conjunction with Stuttgart University of Applied Sciences and the Technical University of Opole in Poland.

These are but a few of many ongoing collaborations. They exemplify the future of scholarship and service in the global university. They permit scholars and scientists to share expertise in the pursuit of new knowledge and in the application of that knowledge to improving material and social conditions. As we continue to move forward we must deepen these relationships and expand the connections. For it is these institutional partnerships that will serve as the bedrock for the future, ensuring not only the continued advancement of knowledge but a growing mutual understanding among citizens of China and other nations.

Technology can help strengthen these connections. This week, we entered into an agreement to develop a Fudan-Yale Center for Educational Cooperation. The new center will build upon existing student exchanges and collaborative programs in law, management, biomedical science, and genetic engineering to establish, among other things, a videoconference facility at Fudan that will permit weekly seminars, faculty lectures, and student presentations to involve participants from both universities.

The availability of online courses opens another possibility for Chinese students and faculty to gain greater understanding of recent advances abroad. Two years ago, Yale, Stanford, and Oxford Universities launched a joint venture, AllLearn.org, that now offers over 80 online courses to its own alumni as well as alumni of a growing number of affiliated U.S. universities. Courses such as these, especially those in the humanities and social sciences, might be of interest to partner institutions in China.

As we strive to become global universities, we must educate our students to think in global terms. Both China and the United States have tremendous challenges within their own countries. China has made extraordinary strides in developing its economy, but it is still engaged in modernizing the financial and legal institutions that support its integration into the world economy. It is also beginning to tackle the problems of uneven growth across its far-flung regions. Similarly, the United States faces the major challenge of improving the lot of its least fortunate citizens, whose children attend substandard schools and who have inadequate health care.

But we face common, global challenges as well - to maintain an integrated global system of trade and investment under a rule of law, to avoid war, to protect the environment, and to prevent the spread of infectious diseases that do not respect national boundaries. We need to educate citizens of the world, who will work together in addressing these global problems.

We cannot do this in isolation. We need to commit ourselves to maintaining and expanding the connections that bind us together. Twenty-five years ago, Deng Xiaoping opened China’s door. We must keep it open by committing ourselves to expanding student and faculty exchanges and creating stronger and deeper institutional partnerships. Together, we can educate global citizens for the future and extend the frontiers of knowledge for the benefit of all humanity.
