I am honored to be with you today. Fudan University is known throughout the world for its many graduates who made major contributions to this nation’s history and progress. And it is increasingly well known for its ambitious aspirations to become one of the world’s great universities. Yale University is proud to be Fudan’s partner in several exciting initiatives today, and we also consider ourselves Fudan’s first international partner, since Fudan’s first president was a Yale graduate.

This conference is devoted to discussion and analysis of the consequences of our 25-year experience of Sino-U.S. educational exchange. I want to begin by setting this experience into the larger context of China’s drive toward rapid economic growth and integration with the world economy. Few decisions of the 20th century will have as profound an impact on the 21st century world as Deng Xiaoping’s announcement of the Open Door Policy in 1978. After sketching the remarkable accomplishments that have flowed from pursuit of that policy, I will comment on the opening of educational exchange relations with the west, which was simply one facet of Mr. Deng’s overall strategy. Finally, I want to suggest how over the next quarter century, continued attention to fostering close international linkages in education can contribute even more significantly to the development of China and the world.

The Open Door Policy
As we all know, in 1978 Deng Xiaoping recognized that major structural reform of the Chinese economy was necessary. In words now well known, he told the Third Plenary Session of the Eleventh Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party:

“We must learn to manage the economy by economic means. If we ourselves don’t know about advanced methods of economic management, we should learn from those who do either at home or abroad. These methods should be applied not only in the operation of enterprise with newly imported technology and equipment, but also in the technical transformation of existing enterprises.”

To achieve the Four Modernizations (of agriculture, industry, national defense, and science and technology), Deng Xiaoping believed it was essential to open the Chinese economy to the outside world, to increase foreign trade and to stimulate foreign investment and technological exchange.

Economic Advancement in the Last Quarter Century
As an economist, I am tempted to devote all of my remarks to the impressive economic advancement of the last quarter century, but let me offer just several reference points.

Foreign trade and investment has increased at an extraordinary rate. Exports have grown tenfold in inflation-adjusted dollars over the past two decades, and foreign direct investment in China has increased by a factor of nearly one hundred, from less than $1 billion to $44 billion.

Increased trade and foreign investment has had a major impact on both the lifestyle and economic well being of the Chinese people. For instance, in 1978 there were no multinational companies doing business in China. There were no Pepsi Cola’s in the country, no Ford cars or trucks, and no Procter & Gamble products. Today, Procter & Gamble employs 4,000 people, making China the company’s second largest country in terms of employment. Their business today is ten times what it was a decade ago. They are also working closely with authorities on projects of significant public importance. They have assisted the Ministry of Education building 100 schools, and they have worked with the Ministry of Health to provide oral health care training to about 70 million children over the past decade

Mr. Deng was wise to recognize the possible economic consequences of expanding international trade. Real gross domestic product has grown nearly eightfold over the past 20 years, and the World Bank has documented that, as a result of its economic growth, China has made the largest single contribution of any country to the reduction of global poverty in the last twenty years. Strikingly, the Bank estimates indicate that while the number of poor people in China fell by 90 million between 1987 and 1998, the number of poor in the rest of the world increased by 82 million during the same period.

Today, China is taking its place among the world’s great economic powers, and the flow of investment now runs in both directions. Just last month, I hosted a delegation of 20 businessmen and women from China. One Chinese CEO was headed to Tennessee to visit a new plant his company had built to manufacture motorcycles for sale in North America.

The educational dimension of the Deng Xiaoping’s reforms
An important ingredient of Mr. Deng’s Open Door Policy was an understanding that progress would be promoted by greater openness in education. In October 1978, Mr. Deng said,

“I support the increase in the number of students going abroad for further study, up to thousands and tens of thousands. On one hand, it serves to raise the standards of our own colleges and universities ƒand we can learn more about situations and problems in need of solving.”

Mr. Deng correctly foresaw that this development would help China to modernize its technology and its economy. What he did not emphasize at the time was how the flow of students across borders would also lead to greater mutual understanding. We have developed a deeper appreciation for the distinctive elements in Chinese and western cultures while at the same time recognizing our common humanity and our common interest in working together.

Deng Xiaoping’s far-sighted initiative a quarter century ago calls to mind an earlier day when Yung Wing became the first Chinese to graduate from an American university in 1854. He came for the same reasons: to help modernize China’s technology and economy. We at Yale take great pride in Yung Wing’s choice to make our school his own. And we are proud to have educated the largest number of those who followed Yung Wing under the auspices of the Chinese Educational Mission, including Zhan Tianyou, Yale Class of 1881, the engineer who is known as the “Father of China’s railroads.”

At the time of the Chinese Educational Mission, most Yale students came from the northeastern United States. Many of them learned as much from interaction with Chinese students as the Chinese students learned about America. The gains flow in both directions. One learns from study abroad, but one also learns from having international students in one’s home country. Today we believe that every Yale student gains from the presence of the 300 Chinese students currently in residence, just as our faculty benefits from the presence of a comparable number of postdoctoral fellows and visiting scholars. Chinese students represent 17% of the international student population at Yale, and 10% of the international students in the United States.

From Student Exchanges to Institutional Collaborations
The tens of thousands of Chinese students and scholars who now come to the United States every year constitute the foundation upon which we are building a deeper and more enduring set of relationships between our countries. I refer to the development of larger-scale institutional partnerships that will become an increasingly important feature of truly global universities. Today, seventeen Yale departments and schools have established partnerships with forty-five universities, government agencies or independent research institutions in sixteen different cities in China. Yale has twenty-six study sites across China, from Liaoning province in the east, to Xinjiang in the far west, from Beijing in the north, to Hong Kong in the south.

Members of our faculty are engaged with Chinese colleagues in collaborative research projects ranging from studies of the Shanghai stock market to the history of the Qing dynasty archives. They are also engaged in collaborative educational projects, such as one involving the Yale School of Nursing and the Medical School of Central South University, in which Chinese nurses learn how to teach other health care workers to prevent the transmission of blood-borne pathogens.

At Tsinghua University, faculty from the Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Studies are working with colleagues to develop a leadership program in environment and sustainable development. The program will train Chinese mayors, national leaders, corporate executives, and NGO managers who are responsible for urban planning and development. Sponsored by the French company Veiolia Environment, this program is a fine example not only of collaboration between universities, but also of partnership among government, corporations, and universities.

One of our most successful collaborations is the China Law Center, which was launched only three years ago. Today, working closely with the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, NGOs, universities, and the government, the China Law Center is making tremendous strides. Professor Gewirtz and his Chinese and American colleagues have studied and begun to undertake reform in the areas of administrative law, regulation, and legal education.

Most of these institutional collaborations arise, not from top-down directives of university administrators, but rather from longstanding personal relationships among scholars and scientists. For instance, my colleague Xu Tian has been working with counterparts here at Fudan University to develop the Fudan-Yale Biomedical Research Center, which will expand on the work of the existing Institute of Developmental Biology and Molecular Medicine. The institute utilizes model organisms to understand the molecular mechanisms of human diseases, including cancer, neuro-degeneration, and hypoxia. Investigators at the institute recently launched a SARS project to search for compounds that convey resistance to coronavirus infection. These research activities involve a continuing exchange of graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and faculty between labs at Fudan and Yale.

How did this fruitful collaboration arise? To begin, Professor Xu has a deep affiliation with both institutions. He did his undergraduate work at Fudan and received his Ph.D. at Yale. But ultimately it comes down to personal relationships. Five of Professor Xu’s collaborators, who are now professors at Fudan, were also trained at Yale. One was Professor Xu’s friend when both were Yale graduate students; another was a visiting scholar in the laboratory of a Yale colleague; one was an exchange student who came to Yale from Fudan and returned to earn his Ph.D. in China, and the other two were postdoctoral fellows in Professor Xu’s Yale lab.

A similar story underlies the formation of the Peking-Yale Joint Center for Plant Molecular Genetics and Agricultural Biotechnology. This is a collaborative project involving exchange visits of scientists from Yale and Peking University, who work together to study the basic biology of plant systems with potential relevance to crop improvement in both China and the United States. When Yale Professor Deng Xing-Wang was an undergraduate at Peking University, he came to know Gu Xiaocheng, who was then the chair of the biology department. Professor Deng moved on to graduate study at Yale and eventually joined the faculty. At Yale he encountered a Ph.D. student who was also a graduate of Peking University, Chen Zhangliang. After Chen returned to a professorship and a vice presidency at Peking, he and Professor Deng initiated their collaboration in plant genomics, and with the approval of Professor Gu, the new Center was launched three years ago.

Such collaborations are becoming increasingly common, arising from the dual allegiance of Chinese scientists to their home and foreign institutions and from the personal relationships formed as a consequence of student and faculty exchanges. They are now becoming institutionalized, taking on a depth and permanence beyond that of a personal relationship between two scholars. They will undoubtedly help propel Chinese science to world leadership, and thus prove the wisdom of Deng Xiaoping’s farsighted encouragement of scientific and cultural exchanges.

The reason that China’s leading universities have become the partners of choice for so many of the world’s most distinguished universities are several: there is the size of China’s population, its significant role on the world stage, and its rapidly growing economy. But an essential ingredient is China’s growing investment in its leading universities and the leadership’s recognition that outstanding universities can be engines of economic growth. At a time when too many European countries are reducing their investment in their flagship universities and when Japan seems disinclined to build the scientific capacity of its greatest institutions of higher education, the leaders of China are wise to recognize that substantial investment in its universities will lead to future economic advancement.

My own studies as an economist have shown that in the United States the most dynamic sectors of the economy – where new jobs are created and productivity growth is most rapid – remain those that create innovative products based on the application of recent scientific knowledge. And the experience of U.S. universities shows that institutions of higher education are by far the most productive sources of scientific discovery.

Yet the knowledge created by the enterprise of academic science is by no means the only contribution of universities to economic growth. By engaging students in intellectual inquiry, making them active participants in the search to know and fostering their problem solving abilities, universities and colleges contribute to economic growth through their teaching as well as their research. Critical studies in humanity and social sciences as much as the sciences and engineering can equip students for leadership in our rapidly evolving world.

For the next set of years, we have a powerful tool to assist the development of intercontinental scholarly collaborations. The revolution in communications must be seized and used strategically as a catalyst. We know that the revolution in communications is dramatically extending the opportunities for scholarly discourse and encouraging collaborations at a distance that were unthinkable even a decade ago. Now in the era of the Internet it is as likely that an economist at Yale will be pursuing a project with a faculty member in Chile or China as with someone at Columbia or MIT. We must be wise to determine how best to take advantage of these new capabilities. In the next decade, the prospects for reaping new benefits from the Open Door Policy are limited only by the will of our political and university leaders.

Conclusion
Deng Xiaoping’s Open Door Policy was ambitious in 1978. In 2003 we require the same mixture of vision and boldness. National governments, whether in China, the U.S. or elsewhere, must make the investment to create and sustain world-class institutions. This will require large financial expenditures and substantial latitude for scholarly inquiry. The United States government must take care not to unduly burden the opportunities for Chinese and other scholars to study in our country just as all governments would do well to recognize the benefits that derive from the most open exchange of ideas.

Those of us on university campuses, faculty and administrators alike, must be ambitious in supporting academic partnerships that create knowledge and address the crucial issues facing the global community. And we must recognize that it is our responsibility to ensure that the most talented young people who attend our institutions understand the promise of openness that Deng Xiaoping heralded. All of us engaged in higher education might do well to recall the words of Timothy Dwight, a former Yale president, who said in 1831: “We owe it to inspire our students and countrymen to recognize that they are not to act like inhabitants of a village, nor like beings of the hour, but like citizens of the world.”
