 It is a pleasure to be with you this evening, to speak with those of you who are here for the annual meeting of the National Association of Independent Schools as well as those of you affiliated with the Parents League of New York City.
Independent schools, though few in number compared with their public counterparts, play an important role in shaping the landscape of American education. For more than a century, they have been at the forefront of pedagogical innovation and educational reform. And today they provide a vastly disproportionate flow of students to the most highly selective colleges and universities. Although they educate only 2% of the nation’s high school students, independent schools nonetheless provide between one-quarter and one-third of the matriculants at highly selective universities.
Independent schools strive to create environments in which learning is valued and teachers are respected. They strive also to educate the whole child, recognizing that extracurricular activities, athletics, and the arts play an important role in the development of children. As a parent of four children educated in outstanding independent schools and as a former trustee who once led the search for a new head of one of these schools, I know first-hand about the astonishing devotion of teachers and school administrators to their important work. I also know about the sacrifices made by so many parents, who send their children to independent schools at great expense, because they want a superior education for their children. And having spent all day Sunday helping with the food concession as my daughter’s school hosted the Western New England Prep School Swim Championships, I also know how parents are called upon to serve independent schools in many ways, to participate in the rich experiences the schools provide to children, and to help the schools succeed in their important work.
Now, I am well aware that I was invited here tonight to speak about college admissions. But before I do, I want to remind the parents among you that the purpose of an independent school education is not admission to college. It is instead to develop in students the ability to read intelligently and critically, to write clearly, to comprehend basic mathematical ideas, to appreciate the process of scientific inquiry, to work independently and to work with others. In short, it is to encourage students to love learning and to provide them with the equipment to continue to learn and grow throughout their lives, on their own and in community, so that they will be prepared to be informed, responsible citizens of our democracy.
From this perspective, college is just another step on the path to lifelong learning and responsible citizenship. We like to think that we contribute value added, and I believe that we do. But we build upon foundations that are laid down at home and at school. The stronger those foundations, the more easily we can accomplish our task.
There is no doubt that the interest in attending highly selective colleges and universities has increased in recent years. Applications to Yale averaged about 11,000 per year in the early 1980s, rose to about 12,500 per year in the late 1980s, then slumped in the early 1990s before rising back to that level in the late 1990s. In the last three years, however, applications have surged from 13,000 to 17,600. The pattern differs at other schools, but a common feature is that applications today are at least 40-50% higher than they were ten or twenty years ago.
The competitive pressures are intense, too intense in my view. There are more than 3,000 colleges and universities in America, and there are a great many that provide outstanding educational opportunities. Our national obsession with rankings has given much too much weight to those institutions that rank high in the survey conducted annually by U.S. News and World Report. Surely, some of the data reported in the survey, such as faculty-student ratios and the percentage of classes with small enrollments are facts worth knowing in selecting a school. But these and other data elements are weighted arbitrarily and added up to produce a ranking that is in itself not very informative. Indeed, the raw differences among the top three schools, and then among the next ten or fifteen, are miniscule. None of us, parents or administrators, should take them too seriously.
Colleges and universities vary on many dimensions. Among these are size, location, areas of academic strength, the nature of the residential experience, the nature and variety of extracurricular opportunities, campus culture, and proximity to off-campus cultural resources. There is rarely one “best fit” for any high school graduate. A number of schools would normally be well suited to the personality and interests of any particular student. It is a mistake to think that only one school will do, and a bigger mistake to think that failure to gain admission to one’s first choice is a defeat.
Independent school administrators sometimes voice the concern that their children are at a disadvantage in competing for admissions to selective institutions. I don’t believe that the numbers support this claim. As I mentioned before, independent schools educate fewer than 2% of America’s high school students. Yet, at Yale, they produce approximately 20% of our applicants, 30% of those offered admission, and 33% of those who matriculate. These percentages were the same in 1980 as they are today. As these numbers imply, the admit rate for independent school students is significantly higher than for the remainder of the applicant pool. We value your students. They are well prepared, and they perform well at Yale.
Still, the purpose of the admissions process - at Yale, at many other colleges, and at many independent schools - is to admit a class that makes the most of our capacity to contribute to the larger society. We aim to prepare those who will serve by becoming leaders in scholarship, business, the professions, religion, the arts, and public life. None of these objectives is best realized by admitting a class that is homogeneous in background or interests. You won’t become a better lawyer if all your undergraduate classmates are interested only in law; nor will you become a better doctor if all your classmates are the product of a single region of the country, a single income stratum, or a single religious background. We all learn from encountering difference, and for this reason alone we would seek a diverse class, absent any other social imperatives.
Thus, without quotas, formal or informal, we seek to admit classes that are diverse with respect to region, interests, and experiences. We seek those with special artistic and athletic talent, as well as those who have displayed the promise of leadership through entrepreneurship, volunteer service, or political involvement. We seek increasingly students from abroad, in part because the presence of international students in today’s more closely connected world creates a richer experience for students from our own country. And we are hopeful that the Supreme Court will tell us that we can continue affirmative efforts to identify and admit students of diverse racial backgrounds.
We continue to seek racial diversity for two fundamental reasons. First, as I indicated, students of all races benefit from exposure to one another. This is more than an article of faith. There is ample evidence from surveys of our graduates that diversity among classmates is highly valued by members of all racial groups and is perceived as enhancing the preparation of all for living in a multiracial society. Second, there is convincing evidence, presented most thoroughly by William Bowen and Derek Bok, that since the 1960s the admission of increasing numbers of racial minorities, especially African-Americans, to highly selective colleges and universities has opened career opportunities and has had a significant and positive impact on the creation of a substantially larger minority middle class, whose members participate in civic life to the same extent as their white counterparts. Today, African-Americans are better represented in the leadership ranks of business and every profession, and in civic and charitable organizations, in no small measure because of the opportunities to attend the finest institutions of higher education that have been extended over the past thirty-five years. Today, for much the same reasons, most independent schools seek racial diversity in the composition of their student bodies, just as we do.
I come at last to the issue that has given me my fifteen minutes of national media attention. Well, actually, it’s been almost fifteen months and I’m still cited from time to time. I refer of course to my heterodox view of the process of early admission to selective colleges and universities.
I spoke up on this subject for two reasons. First, I believe that the early admissions process and binding early decision programs in particular do not serve the interests of high school students. And, second, I believe that binding early decision programs undermine one of the principle goals of the admissions process in those schools offering need-blind admissions and full, need-based financial aid. That goal is to broaden access so that the finest institutions of higher education are available and affordable for those who qualify for admission, regardless of the ability of parents to pay.
For several decades prior to the last one, most selective schools offered non-binding early admission programs (now called “early action”), by which offers of admission were extended in December to some of those who applied early. The students were not bound to accept these offers; they could apply elsewhere on the regular timetable and notify all schools of their decision by May 1. Only a small fraction of students applied early, and typically no more than 10 or 15 per cent of a class was admitted by this route. In the late 1980s several schools found it to their advantage to introduce binding early decision programs, where students had to commit in advance to accepting an early offer of admission. This helped the schools that initiated such programs, by letting them identify students who clearly viewed them as their school of choice. And it helped those students who had a clear first choice. But still, only limited numbers were involved.
Through the early 1990s, one school after another hopped on the early decision bandwagon, and the numbers began to rise. Today, most highly selective schools admit anywhere from one-third to nearly two-thirds of their entering classes early. Among the most selective schools, only a few - notably Harvard, MIT, Chicago, and Georgetown - still had non-binding early action programs as of last year. Within the past year, after the very favorable public reaction to the views I expressed in a New York Times interview, Beloit College, the University of North Carolina, Yale, and Stanford have all reverted from early decision to early action.
There are at least four problems with the current system of early admissions. All of these problems would substantially disappear if all forms of early admissions were eliminated; they would significantly mitigated by replacing early decision with early action.
The first of these is that the current system encourages many students to form a view of their first-choice college too early in the high school careers. Those of you who work with high school students know even better than I how rapidly many of them are growing and changing. A student’s passions, friendships, and activities may change substantially in the last year of high school. It is not in a student’s best interest to expect him or her to visit colleges in the junior year and to come to a first choice early in the fall of the senior year. Most students would benefit from having until May 1 to decide which among several colleges would be the best fit for them.
Second, the current system encourages students to introduce strategic considerations into selecting a first-choice college, instead of relying entirely on his or her personal preferences. School heads and college counselors, under pressure from parents and prospective parents to produce a good record of early placement, encourage students to come to a first choice, which, more often than not, means making a commitment to a school with a binding early decision program. And many students are discouraged from applying to their true “first choice,” because a well-meaning counselor reckons that the probability of admission is very low.
Third, the current system disrupts the senior year of high school, especially in independent schools where a large fraction of seniors apply early. Most fundamentally, because the college admissions game is played all year long, it dominates the entire year in the minds of students. If no admissions took place until April, there would be more time for high school. Instead, in December, a certain fraction of the class receives good news. But, unless the counselors are much too conservative and aim nearly everyone too low, a comparable number of students are deferred or rejected. This splits the class into those who are eligible for early senior slide, and those who have to live with disappointment and anxiety for the next four months. And there is yet a third group, those who didn’t apply early, who often come to believe that they missed out on an important part of the year’s experience.
Finally, a system in which most schools have binding early decision programs works profoundly to the disadvantage of students needing financial aid. If such students are admitted to an early decision school, they must either accept the aid package they are awarded or decline the offer of admission. They are not allowed to wait until April to compare the aid package with those offered elsewhere. Thus, students seeking financial aid disproportionately pass up the opportunity to apply early. And this has consequences, because - as counselors understand and as a recent study by Chris Avery, Andrew Fairbanks, and Richard Zeckhauser confirms - the probability of admission, for any given individual, is substantially higher in the early round, especially at early decision schools. In sum, early decision programs will tend to diminish the fraction of a collegiate student body on financial aid.
The first three features of the current system that I mentioned have adverse consequences for high school students, but they don’t necessarily weigh heavily in the consideration given to reform by colleges. From the point of view of the college, early decision programs have two attractions. First, because the yield on early applicants is predictable, early decision enhances a school’s ability to shape a diverse class with many attributes and talents represented. Second, it guarantees that a substantial fraction of the student body will enter with a positive attitude, having chosen their school, instead of viewing it as the best available default option.
The fourth feature of the current system is not only adverse from the point of view of students needing financial aid; it also undermines the commitment of colleges and universities to increase access. The steady lowering of barriers with respect to religion, race, gender, nationality, and economic status has made America’s selective colleges and universities increasingly a beacon of hope, the custodians of a promise that unbounded opportunities are available to those who excel, regardless of background. Early decision programs work against this trend. They are biased in favor of the affluent, a bias that subverts an important public purpose of the admissions process.
The problems I have identified would more or less disappear if all early admissions programs were abandoned. I’m not suggesting that the pressures to get into selective colleges would disappear, but students would have more time to decide and they would have less reason to engage in strategic behavior. The integrity of the senior year would be restored, and students with financial need would no longer be disadvantaged. Unfortunately, it is not so easy to get from here to there, unless all colleges and universities moved simultaneously in this direction. And there are a number of colleges firmly wedded not simply to early admissions, but to binding early decision programs. In such an environment, any single school opting to abstain from early admissions while others persisted would run the risk of losing qualified applicants who simply couldn’t or wouldn’t wait.
Thus, at Yale this year, we chose a less risky course. We announced that we will return to the regime that prevailed until 1995 - a regime of non-binding early action, where applicants attest that they are seeking early admission to one school only. This approach, were it to prevail everywhere, would substantially mitigate (though not eliminate) the pressure to choose a college too early, since one’s first choice would not be binding. It would somewhat mitigate (but not eliminate) the consequences of behaving strategically. For example, if one applied early to one’s second choice because the odds of admission were high, one could still apply later to one’s first choice. The disruption of the senior year would be only slightly mitigated, but, importantly, the disadvantage to students with financial need would be eliminated. Those admitted early could wait to compare their aid offers with those of other schools, and thus there would be no disincentive to making an early application.
You might ask, why allow non-binding applications to only one school? The answer is simple. If everyone switched to early action and allowed multiple applications, there would be an inevitable pressure for everyone to make all their applications early and the whole system would be deprived of using evidence of a student’s senior year performance. If we are going to move toward one common admissions cycle, it would be far preferable, from the perspective of both the high schools and the colleges, to have those decisions made in April rather than December.
What will happen next? I wish I knew the answer. I had hoped that the announcement of our new policy in November would encourage other early decision schools to follow as they came to realize that their policies were perceived as unfriendly to high school students and high schools. In fact, only Stanford followed, announcing their move to early action six hours after our announcement. I still believe, however, that early action serves the interest of students better than early decision, for the reasons I have given. If you share this view, you can help. If NAIS schools were to convey to the remaining early decision schools that they strongly favored early action, it would help to move a number of schools in the right direction.
Let me close where I began. You represent a group of exceptional schools that educate thousands of exceptional children. We admire the quality of education that NAIS schools provide, and your students will continue to fare well in the admissions process. But you, and here I mean both schools and parents, can play a role in reducing the pressure that we put on our children. We are trying to do our part, although we recognize that we could lighten up in our intense efforts to recruit the students we admit. But you could lighten up, too. Acknowledge that there are many fine choices for your children and that no one school is a perfect fit. Let your children explore the options and don’t rush them to a premature decision. And urge those colleges that retain early decision programs to abandon them. This will not take all the pressure out of the college admissions process, but it will help.
 