 I am greatly honored by the invitation of the Ministry of Education to participate in this important forum involving the presidents of China’s leading universities and others from around the world. This is a propitious time for such a gathering, for those of us outside China are watching with admiration the enormous investment your country is making to improve the capacity, quality, and international standing of your universities. I want to express my profound gratitude to Minister Zhou for taking the initiative to organize this event. I look forward to a stimulating exchange of views.
In the sessions to follow we will hear from several colleagues about the strategies they have formulated to strengthen the academic programs of their institutions. Several others will discuss the contributions their universities have made to local, regional, and national economic development, and still other speakers will discuss broader trends that affect us all, such as the globalization and the democratization of higher education. Common to all these subjects - which are of great interest and importance - is the need for effective presidential leadership, which is the topic I shall address this morning.
My thoughts are not intended to be comprehensive. Instead, I want to offer a few lessons about leadership by illustrating them in the context of historical experience. I have chosen as my “case study” Charles William Eliot, Harvard’s longest serving and most successful president. My reasons for choosing this example, and its relevance to those who are shaping Chinese universities today will become evident as I tell the story.
Charles William Eliot
Charles Eliot served as the president of Harvard University for forty years, from 1869 until 1909.1 He was, almost certainly, the most influential university president of his time. I believe that it is fair to say that, cumulatively, the changes he wrought at Harvard had as significant and as enduring an impact on higher education in the United States as the accomplishments of any university president before or since. He became a national figure during the second half of his tenure as a spokesman for liberal individualism and an advocate of school reform. In retirement, he championed continuing adult education through his role in conceiving and editing the Harvard Classics, a multivolume series of the greatest works of western civilization.
In the contemporary discussion of leadership - in general management as well as in education - much is made of the importance of vision. We expect good leaders to have a vision, to state it clearly and frequently, and to take actions that advance toward its realization. In these respects, Eliot was truly extraordinary. From the very beginning, he articulated a clear and ambitious vision for transforming Harvard. His vision had three major elements. First, he envisioned an undergraduate curriculum with more freedom to choose among a wider variety of elective courses. Second, he wanted to provide greater opportunity for future teachers and scholars to pursue advanced subjects beyond the bachelor’s degree, and, third, he wanted to elevate to a higher standard Harvard’s professional schools of law, medicine, and theology, and open them only to those who had already completed an undergraduate degree. His ultimate goals were ambitious, but he managed expectations so that gradual progress toward them was regarded as success. He restructured the presidency so that he could spend more time on his highest long-term priorities. He took risks, persevered in the face of initial failure, and understood when it was most advantageous to act on his own and when he needed to first build support within the faculty. He selected strong leaders for supporting roles, and he aligned their incentives so that their personal triumphs were institutional triumphs. I will comment on all of these attributes of Eliot’s leadership as I tell his story.
Among Eliot’s accomplishments at Harvard, the best known was his transformation of the undergraduate curriculum from one that was largely a prescribed set of required courses to a completely unconstrained set of elective courses. In fairness, Eliot was neither the first champion of the elective system, nor was he the first to introduce elective courses at Harvard. But he took the idea to its logical and, indeed, ideological conclusion. In Eliot’s view, the well-prepared student should be entirely free to shape his (Harvard educated only men in these years) own education. He railed against the defects of coercion, but supported instead the use of incentives to bring coherence to a potentially unstructured course of study. He seized upon the clever idea of awarding “honors” only to those graduating seniors who took a sufficient number of courses within a single discipline and earned sufficiently high marks. Thus, Harvard under Eliot was the first U.S. university to conceive of the undergraduate “concentration” (as it is still called today at Harvard) or “major” (as it called elsewhere in the U.S.), although it did not actually require students to select a major subject.
When I claimed that Eliot took the elective system to its to its ideological conclusion, I meant this quite literally. He began with the assertion in his inaugural address that “the young man of nineteen or twenty ought to know what he likes best and is most fit for.”2 We might think of this as an opinion rooted in developmental psychology, rather than political ideology. But later in his career, he began to see the elective system as yet another step in the gradual emancipation of man from tradition and tyranny. Grandiosely, he claimed the system of elective courses was “an outcome of the Protestant Reformation … an outcome of the spirit of political liberty.”3 He believed it was a natural extension of the freedoms that America granted its citizens in religion, political life, and economic activity. Few educators today would carry Eliot’s logic quite so far. Most U.S. universities now offer an abundance of elective courses, but choice among them is typically constrained by requirements that students display some degree of breadth across different fields of study, as well as some degree of concentration on a major field.
Although Eliot’s reforms of the undergraduate curriculum were regarded at the time as his primary contribution, I would like to emphasize instead a more enduring contribution, his leadership in transforming Harvard into a modern university. Although this took decades to accomplish in full, what is remarkable is that a vision of what was needed was clear to him upon assuming the presidency at age 35, and the most critical steps in the transformation were all taken in his first decade of service.
To understand what Eliot accomplished and how he accomplished it, one has to begin with a sketch of Harvard in 1869. Though a university in name, Harvard was then a small undergraduate college, enrolling about 150 students in each class, surrounded by a relatively young “scientific school” and three loosely affiliated professional schools of law, divinity, and medicine. The president had focused historically on the college, where he typically taught classes and preached sermons in the chapel. The Lawrence Scientific School commanded some presidential attention, since it had been founded only two decades earlier and frequently came into conflict over laboratory space and equipment with the older, more established, and wealthier college. But presidents before Eliot had paid little or no attention to the professional schools, which had very small, self-governing faculties and were mired in complacency. For example, the language describing the Law School’s entry requirements and course of study had not been altered by one word in twenty years, and the School’s annual reports, submitted to the president by its three faculty members, had contained the following sentence for ten consecutive years: “There have been no new arrangements in relation to the organization of the School or the course of study.”4 Harvard’s faculty was the most distinguished in the nation, but Yale had a better claim to being a national institution. Only 30% of Harvard’s students came from outside New England, compared to more than 60% of Yale’s.5
To this parochial, college-centered institution, Eliot brought a transformative vision. Like others in his time, such as Daniel Coit Gilman, the first president of Johns Hopkins, Eliot took inspiration from the superior training in research offered by German universities. But unlike Gilman, he did not seek to replicate the German model. Just months before he was offered the Harvard presidency, he wrote in the Atlantic Monthly magazine: “… a university, in any worthy sense of the term, must grow from seed. It cannot be transplanted from England or Germany in full leaf and bearing. … When the American university appears, it will not be a copy of foreign institutions, or a hot-bed plant, but the slow and natural outgrowth of American social and political habits… The American college is an institution without a parallel; the American university will be equally original.”6
Eliot was correct to say that the evolving American university would be original, but he erred in characterizing it as “a slow and natural outgrowth of American social and political habits.” He made it happen faster than he himself imagined possible.
As I mentioned, Eliot’s vision of an American university involved three central elements: an undergraduate college devoted to general education without premature specialization, opportunity for those with an undergraduate education to pursue advanced study and research in the arts and sciences, and a set of professional schools such as law, medicine, and divinity for those who had already experienced the rigors of a broad and general undergraduate education. To get from the Harvard of 1869 to this ideal model of an American university required moving the institution in two different directions: toward the European model of graduate education in the arts and sciences, and away from the European model of early concentration on professional education.
Modern university presidents would recognize instantly what Eliot perceived as one of the greatest obstacles to the realization of his vision: the demands and expectations that, as president, he spend much of his time engaged in activities that contribute only minimally to the advancement of the institution. He tackled this problem courageously; he immediately freed himself from the president’s traditional pedagogical and disciplinary obligations by creating the position of Dean of Harvard College. This gave him the time to preside, not simply at meetings of the College faculty, but at meetings of the faculties of all the schools. And meet they did. Eliot’s biographer, Henry James (a nephew of the famous novelist), indicates that in his first year the faculty of the College met forty-five times, while the scientific school and the professional school faculties met forty-four times. Eliot often extended these meetings until eleven in the evening, encouraging free discussion and asking questions designed to explore the minds of his colleagues about changes that he was contemplating.7 Thus, he prepared the ground for reform, knowing that the faculty’s support would be necessary for much that he hoped to accomplish.
Eliot also moved quickly to prepare the way for both expansion and a greater integration of the schools into a single university. Employing a judicious mix of top-down authority and bottom-up persuasive talent, he acquired a significant quantity of adjacent land (a top-down initiative), and he persuaded the faculties to put all schools on a common academic calendar, and, soon thereafter, to open all courses to any student in the university.
Graduate Education
Let us now consider how Eliot managed the evolution of Harvard toward graduate education. He first articulated a very clear vision of what he hoped to accomplish. I hesitate to speak so bluntly, but what he wished to do was imitate Yale! He noted that the Lawrence Scientific School founded at Harvard in 1846 had been intended to permit advanced study beyond the bachelor’s degree, but in fact the overwhelming majority of its students were simply pursuing bachelor’s degrees in scientific subjects as an alternative to attending Harvard College. For the few graduates pursuing further study, there was no organized program or formal course of study. Yale, by contrast, had formalized postgraduate study by creating the Department of Philosophy and the Arts in 1847 to offer advanced instruction in philology, philosophy, and natural science. In 1869, Eliot wrote: “The history of the development of the Department of Philosophy and the Arts in Yale College is so full of instruction as to justify … dwelling upon it at some length; it is at once an epitome of the past history of scientific instruction in this country, and a prophecy of its future.”8
In 1860, Yale became the first university in America to offer the Ph.D. degree - which was earned after two years of study by evidence of high attainment in two branches of learning. Only candidates with the bachelor’s degree, or those who passed an equivalency examination, were eligible to undertake doctoral studies. By 1869, Yale had awarded thirteen PhDs, causing Eliot to opine: “This legitimate success at Yale, on a really high level, if also on a modest scale, points the way to improvements which ought soon to be made at all the more important American “universities,” which will then better deserve their ambitious title.”9 I have yet to discover in the writings of any other Harvard president such generous praise of Yale.
There is a lesson in this, for Eliot’s willingness to learn from the experience of others is another mark of his greatness. An outstanding leader should recognize and acknowledge the deficiencies of his institution and be willing to borrow and adapt superior practices employed by others. In this respect, I have been deeply impressed by the eagerness of Chinese university presidents to learn about best practices throughout the world, and to modify and adapt them to suit the Chinese environment.
Determined to create an organized course of advanced study, worthy of those who had already graduated from Harvard College, Eliot displayed in his first years two other attributes of a great leader: a willingness to experiment and perseverance in the face of failure. His predecessor, Thomas Hill, had instituted what were called University Lectures. These were short courses taught by scholars from both Harvard College and outside, and they chiefly provided an opportunity to expose graduates and undergraduates alike to advanced ideas, mostly in the sciences. Eliot decided to adapt this institution to his purposes. He invited the most distinguished intellectuals in Boston and New Haven to give two series of lectures - one philosophical and one literary. Ralph Waldo Emerson, Charles Saunders Pierce, James Russell Lowell, and William Dean Howells were among the distinguished lecturers, who were compensated by charging those who enrolled $150 for each series, an amount equivalent to the prevailing annual tuition of Harvard College.
Eliot declared the lectures intended for advanced students, but open to the public, including women. This was a bold and risky experiment, but because the University Lectures were already in place and were not considered part of the curriculum of the college, or any of the other schools, Eliot was able to introduce his new scheme from the top down, without faculty approval.
There is another lesson in this; it is easier for a president to initiate new programs and even new schools than to modify existing ones, which would typically require faculty approval. Today, at least in America, only the most courageous president would attempt to reform an existing curriculum from the top down; curriculum reform is almost always the work of a faculty committee, which can be encouraged from the top but rarely directed. Thus, when I initiated a comprehensive review of the undergraduate curriculum at Yale in 2001, I put the task in the hands of a 42-member committee of faculty and students. I met with the committee several times and pointed them in what I considered the right direction, but they reached their own conclusions. By contrast, in areas previously uncharted by Yale - such as advanced education for mid-career professionals, I have been able to create entirely new programs strictly from the top down. The Yale World Fellows Program, which brings together emerging leaders from around the world for an intense period studying global issues, is a case in point.
To return to Eliot, and to speak bluntly, his first attempt at graduate education was a dismal failure. One hundred fifty-five people enrolled in one or more of the two courses, making the Lectures economically viable, but only four recent graduates of the College enrolled in the philosophical course, while six enrolled in the literary course. These young men were the only attendees who sat for examinations on the lecture material. The remainder of the audience were adult gentlemen and women seeking intellectual enrichment, not the aspiring professors and teachers whom Eliot hoped to attract.
Undaunted, Eliot varied the experiment the next year, offering a large number of short courses, available for ten dollars or less per course. But again the results disappointed. In his annual report, Eliot wrote that the University Lectures “have not induced Bachelors of Arts of this University to remain in Cambridge for purposes of independent study, and they have not attracted to the University advanced students from other places.”10 Showing where he was headed next, Eliot went on to say, “Advanced students want profound, continuous and systematic teaching.” He suggested that “fresh utterances of distinguished scholars who were not professional teachers” had failed the mark. What was needed were resident teachers who were professional instructors.
And so, learning from failure and but still focused on his original goal, Eliot came to the two-pronged approach that gave him the outcome he desired. First, he had to organize the resident faculties to provide the needed advanced instruction. He did this by creating, in effect, a “graduate department,” governed by the “Academic Council,” a re-creation of a dormant institution consisting of the professors and assistant professors in all the schools. With Eliot presiding, the Council formally inaugurated the degrees of Master of Arts, Doctor of Science (S.D.), and Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.). In 1873, twelve years behind its New Haven rival, Harvard awarded its first doctorates.
Second, he had to expand the size of the faculty, to bring in those who had not invested a career in the still largely prescribed curriculum of the college. Here two of Eliot’s principal objectives dovetailed perfectly. He wanted advanced courses suitable for graduate students, and he wanted to increase the number and variety of elective courses in the undergraduate college. Thus, Eliot embarked on a hiring spree, and here, unlike presidents today, he had free rein. Curricular changes required faculty approval, as they do today, but the appointment of faculty was entirely in the president’s hands, subject only to the approval of the Corporation, Harvard’s governing board. And here Eliot made an indelible mark - altering more than the organization of the institution, going to the heart of its substance. Though he failed to entice the pair of distinguished Yale professors who were his very first targets, within four years, Eliot hired more than two dozen new members of the faculty, including Henry Adams (perhaps America’s greatest historian), Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. (a constitutional scholar who later became a Justice of the Supreme Court), William James (a philosopher who explored the foundations of psychology), C.C. Langdell (a distinguished legal scholar who invented the “case method” of teaching law) and Charles Eliot Norton (a distinguished art historian and founder of The Nation, a well-known magazine of political and cultural commentary).
Eliot’s recruitment of such extraordinary individuals reminds us that nothing we do is more important than selecting the best people. Although few of us have the authority to appoint faculty directly, most of us appoint administrative officers, deans, and department chairs. These administrators inspire the faculty to maintain high standards and seek continuous improvement throughout the institution. We should all ask ourselves whether we are giving the selection and recruitment of outstanding talent the attention it deserves.
The new faculty hired by Eliot gave Harvard the capacity to educate graduate students more effectively and to expand the elective system in Harvard College. During Eliot’s first decade, the number of required undergraduate courses diminished from 40 to 22, and the number of electives permitted rose from 20 to 34, chosen from a substantially larger menu. By 1884, all courses for sophomores, juniors, and seniors were elective, and, for the first time, the elective system was extended to freshmen, who were allowed to choose more than half their courses.
Similarly, Eliot’s vision of a rigorous program of graduate education required some time to come into being. Even after the doctoral degrees were introduced, very few courses were offered exclusively for graduate students. Instead, Ph.D. students simply had the opportunity to choose from the growing menu of elective courses those they had missed as undergraduates. It was not until 1890, spurred by the success of Johns Hopkins in graduate education, that Harvard turned its “Graduate Department” into a full-fledged Graduate School, and began to create a serious course of graduate study in the several disciplines.
Professional Education
Of all Eliot’s reforms, the most distinctly personal and original was his transformation of professional education. Nearly twenty years before Eliot took office, Francis Wayland, the president of Brown University, had advocated the elective system for undergraduates, and Harvard had begun to introduce elective courses before Eliot greatly expanded their number. Both Yale and Johns Hopkins established doctoral programs before Eliot, through trial and error, moved Harvard toward the form of graduate education that became the American standard. But Eliot’s views on professional education, and the reforms he initiated, had no significant precursors.
Eliot was appalled by the condition of professional education as he found it in 1869. In his Atlantic Monthly article, he observed: “The term learned profession’ is getting to have a sarcastic flavor. Only a very small proportion of lawyers, doctors, and ministers, the country over, are Bachelors of Arts. The degrees of LL.B. and M.D. stand, on the average, for decidedly less culture than the degree of A.B., and it is found quite possible to prepare young men of scanty education to be successful pulpit exhorters in a year or eighteen months.”11 Eliot went on, using the example of the University of Michigan, to note that both the standard of admission and the duration of the course of study were insufficient to produce truly learned professionals. Only 12% of Michigan’s law students and 5% of its medical students had bachelor’s degrees on admission, and the formal course of study in law was only one year.
Eliot found matters no better at Harvard upon assuming the presidency. The vast majority of students enrolled in the Schools of Law, Medicine, and Divinity were admitted directly from high school. And the standards for graduation were minimal: three years in residence without examination in the Divinity School, eighteen months without examination at the Law School, and a year of study (plus three to six months work with a practitioner) at the Medical School. There was no concept of progression within the curriculum; courses might be taken in any order.
In his efforts to transform the situation he confronted, Eliot displayed many of the characteristics of an effective academic leader. He had a clear and well-articulated vision. He set ambitious goals. He patiently devoted the time required to win over complacent members faculties. He took significant risk. He used the authority of his office to initiate some changes from the top down, and he employed his persuasive powers to win support for changes from the bottom up.
In his earliest annual reports, Eliot made clear what he hoped to accomplish - to raise the standards for admission and graduation, and to bring greater coherence to the curriculum of each professional school. Within two years, each of the major schools made dramatic progress.
The Divinity School was the most easily reformed, for the conditions Eliot sought had once been the norm. At his urging, the faculty quickly restored an earlier requirement that candidates for admission demonstrate mastery of Greek and Latin, and the School established a requirement that graduates must pass an examination.
The Law School presented a greater challenge, since the faculty was complacent, training was haphazard, and the curriculum had no logical progression from elementary to advanced courses. Fortunately for Eliot, one of the School’s three senior faculty members resigned, insulted by the new president’s stated desire for reform. This gave Eliot the opportunity he needed. He promptly appointed C.C. Langdell, a legal scholar of the first rank, and persuaded the remaining two senior faculty members to elect him as dean. Langdell made Eliot’s agenda his own, extending the period of study from one to two years and requiring satisfactory performance on examinations for graduation. He divided the curriculum into first and second-year courses, and he went well beyond Eliot’s own aspirations for improving legal education. He pioneered the teaching of law through the study of decided “cases” rather than treatises. Under Langdell’s leadership, with Eliot’s unwavering support, the Law School flourished, enrolling an ever-increasing percentage of students who held bachelor’s degrees. Within a decade, a college education, or an examination demonstrating equivalent preparation, became a requirement for admission, as Eliot had hoped.
The Medical School presented the greatest challenge of all, for the leader of the faculty, Dr. Henry Bigelow, was inalterably opposed to change. Faced with intransigence, Eliot wisely employed a mix of top-down and bottom-up strategies. From above, he assumed control of the finances of all the professional schools, dampening the objections of the relatively prosperous Medical School. Then, coolly and patiently, Eliot presided over 31 faculty meetings in two years, enough to persuade the faculty to support the reforms he desired over Bigelow’s continued opposition. In a colorful account, Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr., a distinguished member of the medical faculty, described the young president’s clarity of purpose and strength of character:
“He [Eliot] comes to the meeting of every Faculty, ours among the rest, and keeps us up to eleven and twelve o’clock at night discussing new arrangements. He shows an extraordinary knowledge of all that relates to every department of the University, and presides with an aplomb, a quiet, imperturbable, serious good-humor, that it is impossible not to admire … I cannot help being amused at some of the scenes we have in our Medical Faculty, – this cool, grave young man proposing in the calmest way to turn everything topsy-turvy …”
“How is it? I should like to ask,” said one of our number the other evening, “that this Faculty has gone on for eighty years, managing its own affairs and doing it well, – … and now within three or four months it is proposed to change all our modes of carrying on the school - it seems very extraordinary, and I should like to know how it happens.”
“I can answer Dr. [Bigelow’s] question very easily,” said the bland, grave young man: “there is a new President.”12
In the end, the faculty completely overhauled the curriculum, bringing a logic and coherency to the course of study, extending the program from eighteen months to three years, requiring the satisfactory completion of annual examinations to progress to the next year of study, and, finally, requiring satisfactory performance on final examinations in all nine of the principal areas of medicine, rather than merely five of nine, as had been previously required.
In raising the standard of medical education so radically, Eliot took considerable risk. Since the imposition of more rigorous standards was bound to reduce the number of students, the School’s financial stability was placed in jeopardy. But Eliot believed that Harvard’s higher calling was to raise the standard of the professions throughout the United States, especially the standard of medical practice. If this required additional funds, he argued, new endowment would be sought. But standards should not be compromised.
As it turned out, the size of the class declined by 35 to 40 per cent, but students now enrolled for three years instead of eighteen months. Three years after the reforms were introduced, the Medical School earned a substantial surplus.
Guidelines for Leadership Recapitulated
Having told the story of Eliot’s early years, let me summarize what it teaches us about leadership.

Develop a vision and communicate it. Eliot did this brilliantly in his 1869 Atlantic Monthly articles and his inaugural address. From the beginning it was clear that he had three major priorities: expanding the elective system for undergraduates, developing a serious program of graduate study in the arts and sciences, and raising the standards of the professional schools. He returned to these themes regularly in his annual reports.
 
Set goals that are ambitious but achievable. Expanding the elective system, creating a serious graduate program, and transforming the professional schools into schools for college graduates - these were all ambitious goals. Eliot knew that none could be achieved in short order; he spoke of a “slow and natural evolution.” By not raising expectations counterproductively, he had the freedom to move gradually, yet he seized the opportunity to make very rapid progress in the first decade of his presidency.
 
Free up enough time to concentrate on major initiatives. Eliot recognized this from the beginning. He immediately appointed a Dean of Harvard College to relieve himself of numerous duties, so that he might have time to attend the meetings of the professional school faculties, where he sought major changes.
 
Take risks. The University Lectures were a worthy attempt to jump-start the transition to graduate education, and he did not shy away from confronting the powerful leaders of the Medical School where an important issue of principle was at stake.
 
Don’t be deterred by initial failures. Some good ideas deserve a second try. Having failed to stimulate interest in graduate education with the University Lectures, he moved directly to the introduction of doctoral degrees.
 
Know where top-down and bottom-up work best. Land purchases, administrative reorganization, and, in his day, faculty appointments were all domains of action reserved to the president. Eliot devoted extensive time to winning faculty support in areas where he needed to persuade, such as curriculum reform in the college and admissions requirements in the professional schools.
 
Select strong leaders for supporting roles, and give them sufficient freedom to take initiative on their own. The appointment of C.C. Langdell as Dean of the Law School is an excellent example. He not only followed through on Eliot’s intentions to strengthen admissions standards; he independently developed a new pedagogy - the case method - that became the dominant paradigm for teaching law.
 
Align incentives. To encourage specialization where most courses were elective, Eliot supported the award of honors only to students with a sufficient number of courses in one discipline, as well as high marks.
 

Conclusion
Most of the issues that concerned Charles Eliot differ from those that engage us today, but we share a common interest in recruiting excellent faculty and improving the quality of education at every level - undergraduate, graduate, and professional. I hope this case study prompts us all to reflect on how we can be better leaders of our own institutions. I chose this particular case to remind us that even the greatest of the educational institutions did not achieve its current standing without ambitious and clear-sighted leadership. Like Eliot, the State Council, the Minister of Education, and the presidents of China’s leading universities have ambitious aspirations. And, like Eliot, China’s government and university leaders recognize their nation would be ill advised to adopt any foreign model wholesale. Like the distinctively American university of which Eliot dreamed and which he significantly shaped, you are borrowing elements from abroad, but adapting them to suit the Chinese environment, creating a unique and original model that is a reflection of Chinese culture and society.
On the twenty-fifth anniversary of Eliot’s election to the Harvard presidency, one hundred and ten years ago, the faculty offered this tribute: “It is the period of the present administration that will be remembered hereafter as the epoch in which the University was first fairly able to take its place among the great seats of learning of the world.”13 Today, those of us who lead universities elsewhere are deeply impressed by China’s determination and commitment to improve the physical infrastructure of its universities, to reform its undergraduate curriculum, and to strengthen its faculty by introducing national and international searches and the systematic evaluation at the point of reappointment, promotion, and tenure. We applaud your ambition and your efforts, and we welcome your leading universities as they take their place among the great seats of learning of the world.

1 Where specific citations are omitted, I have drawn primarily on two excellent biographies of Eliot: Henry James, Charles W. Eliot, Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1930, and Hugh Hawkins, Between Harvard and America: The Educational Leadership of Charles W. Eliot, New York: Oxford University Press, 1972.
2 Charles William Eliot, “Inaugural Address as President of Harvard, 1869,” reprinted in Richard Hofstadter and Wilson Smith, eds. American Higher Education: a Documentary History, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961, p. 608.
3 Eliot, “Experience with a College Elective System,” unpublished address, 1895, cited in Hawkins, p. 94.
4 James, p. 267.
5 Edward D. Page, “Two Decades of Yale and Harvard: A Retrospect,” The Nation, February 18, 1886, pp. 3-4.
6 Eliot, “The New Education,” Atlantic Monthly, XXIII, February and March 1869, pp. 202-20, 365-66, reprinted in Hofstadter and Smith, p. 636-37.
7 James, pp. 243-44.
8 Eliot, “The New Education” reprinted in Hofstadter and Smith, p. 628.
9 Ibid., p. 629.
10 Eliot, “Annual Report, 1871-72,” cited in James, p. 251.
11 Eliot, “The New Education, reprinted in Hofstadter and Smith, p. 635.
12 James, pp. 283-85.
13 Cited in Hawkins, pp. 78-79.
 