 Minister Zhou, Minister Zhao, Vice President Huang, Chancellor Min:
It is an honor to be here, to thank you for your leadership and partnership. Minister Zhou, I know I speak for all the presidents gathered here, from China and from abroad, in thanking you first for sponsoring the conference we begin tomorrow. But more importantly, we thank you for the leadership that you and your colleagues have provided to advance higher education in China and to promote educational collaboration around the world.
I also want to acknowledge the fruitful collaboration Yale has enjoyed with the Chinese International Publishing Group for over a decade and to thank Minister Zhao for his support. The Culture & Civilization of China series has created an international community of scholars working both in China and abroad to produce outstanding scholarship on aspects of China’s cultural heritage. Books on Chinese art, architecture, and philosophy have already been produced, and, in the next few years, they will be joined by books on Chinese archeology, sculpture, textiles and calligraphy. The creation of knowledge and its dissemination through scholarly publications are at the heart of the university’s mission, and we are grateful to CIPG for giving Yale the opportunity to carry on this important work.
On a personal level, I am deeply honored that CIPG has published my book, and I am grateful for the meticulous attention to detail involved in the production of this edition. But more importantly, I am grateful for and impressed by the commitment of CIPG to work in partnership with foreign scholars and publishers to advance the dissemination of scholarship both in China and around the world.
This afternoon, we focus on a more venerable tradition of collaboration. (As you have heard,) this year represents the 150th anniversary of the graduation of the first Chinese student to earn a degree in a North American university, possibly the first Chinese student to earn a degree in any foreign university.
Yung Wing’s story offers us important lessons that inspire us to continue to strive for closer association between China’s universities and foreign institutions.
The first lesson is that generosity of spirit is often needed to initiate something new and entirely untried. It was a Yale graduate from the United States working in southern China who spotted the talented Chinese boy, Yung Wing, sponsored his passage to the United States, and arranged for his educational studies.
The second lesson is one we see daily on our campuses. Students must be adventuresome as well as bright to be highly successful. Yung Wing endured a 98-day passage to get to Yale. When he entered the college, he was quick to get involved: he sang in the choirs, played football, joined the Boat Club, and showing the academic prowess we see in so many of our current Chinese students, he won two academic prizes - for English composition.
The third lesson is one I try to cultivate in our students today. Yung Wing developed a sense of obligation to help others as he had been helped. In his final year as a student at Yale, he dreamed of enabling many other Chinese youth to study abroad so that they could return to China well equipped to contribute to China’s modernization and advancement.
Yung Wing worked with determination for 18 years to see his dream realized. In 1872, he wrote to Yale’s President to report that the Chinese Government had agreed upon the plan of “sending some of its native youths to the United States to be thoroughly educated for the Chinese public service.” The Chinese Educational Mission was thereby created, and over the next decade it brought 120 Chinese boys to study in the Northeastern United States.
This brings me to the fourth lesson of Yung Wing’s story. Governments - yours and mine - can seize the opportunity to be ambitious and bold in embracing new educational initiatives and international exchange. Like the other representatives of foreign universities who are visiting this week, I have been inspired by the investment your government is now making in China’s higher education system and by your leaders’ evident recognition that strong universities are engines of economic and societal advancement. The creation of the Chinese Educational Mission 132 years ago can be viewed as foreshadowing the boldness of today’s Ministry of Education and the Presidents of so many Chinese universities who are pursuing institutional improvement through expanded international collaborations and student exchanges.
A fifth and final lesson from the story of Yung Wing is that both host country and home country can benefit from new forms of international educational exchange. The United States benefited directly from Yung Wing’s Yale education when he came to Washington, D.C. in 1878 as a member of China’s first permanent mission to our country. How fortunate it must have been for the United States to have as a resident diplomat someone who had studied in our country and was thus well positioned to translate diplomatic concerns in ways most likely to be understood by both U.S. and Chinese officials.
China also benefited enormously from Yung Wing’s ambitious dream of the China Educational Mission, because of the many important contributions made by to the betterment of Chinese society by the students who returned.
Yale graduate Zhan Tianyou returned to China and became the first Chinese to undertake a railroad building project using only Chinese funds and Chinese supervisors. Other prominent alumni of the Chinese Educational Mission included a governor, a foreign minister, a prime minister, and the first president of Tsinghua University.
The students involved in the Chinese Educational Mission in the United States numbered only 120, but it established the tradition of Chinese students studying around the world. The system of overseas study that Yung Wing inaugurated has grown dramatically over the last quarter century, since Deng Xiao-ping’s reforms began and the door to student exchange was reopened. More than 700,000 Chinese students and scholars have participated in educational programs in 108 countries. These Chinese have enriched every foreign university in which they have enrolled.
Today, we remember Yung Wing on the 150th anniversary of his graduation from Yale not because it is a Yale story, but rather to celebrate the expansion of his vision, which is today embraced so boldly by China’s leaders. We may do well to recall the words of Deng Xiaoping 26 years ago when he declared:
“I support the increase in the number of students going abroad for further study, up to thousands and tens of thousands… [I]t serves to raise the standards of our own colleges and universities.”
I close by adding that these exchanges also serve to raise the standards of my institution and others around the world. Moreover, they enable us to achieve a better understanding of one another and thus encourage peace and friendship among nations.
 