 Panel on the Interaction between Urban Development and Higher Education
I am honored to participate on today’s panel. Like many other educators around the world, I have admired China’s impressive advancement and especially its decision to invest heavily in its leading universities. This is not only an enlightened policy for advancing human potential; it is also a wise strategy for promoting economic growth nationally and locally.
I want to start by discussing national science policy, rather than local or regional issues, because without a strong national commitment to advancing fundamental science, the contributions universities can make to local economies will fall far short of their potential. To illustrate my points, I will take the U.S. experience of the last half century as a “case study.
In the immediate aftermath of World War II, the U.S. government recognized that public investment was essential to generate steady progress in basic science. Fundamental scientific discoveries are the foundation of industrial technology. The economic consequences of these discoveries are rarely understood immediately and may take decades to be fully worked out. Thus, private firms have little incentive to undertake the long-term, unpredictable work of basic science. Government must take the lead.
An important 1946 report established the framework for an unprecedented and heavily subsidized system in support of scientific research that has propelled the American economy. The system rested upon three principles that remain largely intact today. First, the federal government shoulders the principal responsibility for the financial support of basic science. Second, universities - rather than government laboratories, non-teaching research institutes, or private industry - are the primary institutions in which this government-funded research is undertaken. This ensures that scientists-in-training, even those who choose industrial rather than academic careers, are exposed to the most advanced methods and results of research. And, third, although the federal budgetary process determines the total funding available for each of the various fields of science, most funds are allocated, not according to commercial or political considerations, but through an intensely competitive process of review conducted by independent scientific experts who judge proposals on their scientific merit alone. This system of organizing science has been an extraordinary success, scientifically and economically.
For much of the period following World War II, most U.S. universities did not actively seek to participate in the translation of discoveries into new projects. An exception was the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. By the mid-1990s, graduates of MIT had founded over 4,000 companies nationwide, and were continuing to create an additional 150 companies a year. Illustrating the impact a university can have on its local economy, more than 1,000 of those companies are based in Massachusetts, accounting for about 25 percent of all manufacturing activity in the state.
If engagement with industry was once the exception among U.S. universities, it is now the norm. Since 1980 over 4,000 companies have been formed based on technology licensed by a university. The shift occurred in part because in 1980 the federal government granted universities the intellectual property rights to inventions made during the course of government-funded research. This simple change created powerful incentives for faculty and their universities to commercialize faculty inventions in order to promote economic development and create additional sources of revenue for academic programs.
This is a strategy that we have pursued recently with great success at Yale. In the last decade we have leveraged our strength in biomedical science to build a biotechnology industry in and around New Haven.
We sought out faculty with an interest in commercializing their results, used students at our School of Management to prepare business plans, drew upon Yale’s extensive connections in the venture capital business to find financing, and helped to find real estate solutions in New Haven. We are starting to see results. More than thirty new biotechnology companies have been established in greater New Haven area. These firms have attracted over $2 billion in capital.
It is no accident that these companies took root in the greater New Haven area within miles of Yale. While manufacturing industries tend to seek locations that offer convenient access to transportation and low-cost labor, companies that depend on innovation for their success put a premium on access to scientific talent - to the faculty-inventors and students who comprise the talent pool from which companies hope to recruit. A sample of 190 research universities reported that 79 percent of the companies founded by faculty in 2003 located in the state of the inventor’s home institution.
What lessons does the experience of the U.S. hold for China?
First, China should carry through its commitment to invest heavily in the development of its research universities. For this investment to be most effective, it must be predictable and sustained over the long term. It takes years for productive research teams to be built, and they are hard to hold together if funding is variable. Predictable funding also helps to assure promising young students that a research career is viable.
Second, research sponsors must be patient in waiting for results. The commercial fruits of the research may not be realized for decades and may be found after pursuing dead ends. The scientists exploring the phenomenon of coherent light in the 1950s did not envision that their invention - the laser - would become the foundation of countless devices by the end of the century.
Third, funding should be allocated through peer-reviewed programs that favor the most meritorious projects. Peer review has the virtue of engaging leading experts in evaluating the quality of projects proposed for funding. Decisions reached through peer review will be better-informed and more likely to bear fruit than decisions that could be made by any government agency. And, in contrast to a formula-driven system of allocating funds, peer review rewards excellence, creativity, and risk-taking on the part of individual researchers, all of which are conducive to world-class excellence.
Fourth, as faculty are encouraged to collaborate with industry in the translation of fundamental discovery into practical application, a balance must be struck to ensure that industry does not unduly distort the priorities of faculty, students, or the nation. Research sponsored by industry can be a great spur to innovation, economic growth, and local development, but it is no substitute for public investment in fundamental science, which is the foundation upon which all else rests.
Finally, let me offer a few words of encouragement. China has set ambitious goals for raising the quality of its universities. I have no doubt that China will succeed. And China’s universities can play a significant role in local economic development without compromising the traditional university missions of education and the advancement of knowledge. As experience shows, leading institutions can at the same time excel in teaching, advance the frontier of knowledge, and fuel local and regional economic development. The world will watch with admiration as China pursues this course in the years ahead.
 