President Komiyama, faculty, students, and staff of the University of Tokyo, ladies and gentlemen, I am grateful to have this opportunity to address you this afternoon.

Yale is honored by its long historical connection with your University. Our first Japanese graduate, Kenjiro Yamakawa of the class of 1875, served as your president. During his presidency he advanced the modernization of university administration in Japan. He later served as the president of Kyoto Imperial University and as the founding president of Kyushu Imperial University, now Kyushu University.

Much more recently, after earning his Ph.D. in economics at Yale, Professor Koichi Hamada launched his distinguished career here at the University of Tokyo, serving full-time on your faculty from 1965 to 1985. We have been fortunate to have him on our faculty ever since, although he has maintained a close connection here. He has done seminal work on international economic policy, and he has become one of the wisest and most respected commentators on the Japanese economy. I am delighted that Professor Hamada is here with us today.

*  *  *  *  *

Many reasons are given for the slowdown of the Japanese economy that began in 1990. Some argue that macroeconomic policy was responsible; others cite a precariously weak financial system. As a micro-economist and longtime student of industrial innovation, I prefer another explanation. Although Japan led the world in process engineering and product quality control, its scientific and financial infrastructure did not provide Japanese companies and entrepreneurs with adequate fuel to drive the kind of radical product innovation in science-based industries that was responsible for the success of the United States economy in the 1990s.

Today, Japan is in the midst of restructuring the funding of its university-based scientific research and it has taken a dramatically new approach to the governance of its universities. I believe that these changes, if carried through with sufficient vigor, hold great promise for strengthening the innovative capacity of the Japanese economy. In these remarks, I’d like to explain why I hold this belief, an explanation that will require first an examination of how universities function in the United States as a steady and reliable engine of innovation and economic growth.

It would come as a surprise to most Americans that Japan’s universities and research-funding institutions are engaged in a period of intense reform. By standard measures of educational performance, and attainment, Japanese students are competitive with the best in the world. A recent study by the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development in September 2005 confirmed that graduation rates among Japanese high school students are among the highest in the world, as is the percentage of those graduates who go on to complete a college degree or other post-secondary education course. Performance scores in mathematics, problem solving, science, and reading for Japanese students are significantly ahead of their peers elsewhere; and the Japanese public and private financial commitment to education is also among the strongest. Taken together, the result has been that Japan has one of the best-educated workforces in the world, particularly in science and technology.

The superior education of the labor force and a large and well-trained pool of engineers contributed mightily to Japan’s rapid growth from 1945 to 1990. In the early years, a high savings rate and a pool of low wage, underemployed labor in agriculture fueled Japan’s growth. By the 1970s and 80s, once its surplus labor was absorbed, Japan had developed a new source of competitive advantage that rested on superior education: it led the world in the engineering of manufacturing processes and the control of product quality. But Japan’s leadership in process innovation and incremental product innovation did not prepare it for the IT revolution of the 1990s. With successive waves of radical innovation in software and communications technology, the U.S. gained a decisive advantage throughout the sector that dominates the world’s most developed economies - the services. Today, Japan’s capacity for radical product innovation in leading-edge technologies such as software and biotechnology is much weaker than the quality of its science and engineering workforce would lead one to expect. The recent reform efforts have begun to address this problem.

For those who are skeptical about my claim that the failure to make radical product innovations explains Japan’s protracted stagnation, consider the following mental experiment: imagine that Microsoft, Netscape, Yahoo, and Google were Japanese companies. Is there any doubt that the Japanese economy would have grown more rapidly after 1995?

The Contribution of University Research to Innovation and Economic Growth
To understand how the current reforms might benefit Japan, it is instructive to examine the U.S. experience of the past sixty years. The Japanese slowdown of the 1990s, and the contrasting U.S. productivity surge, made clear what many commentators had missed in the 1980s: the source of American economic leadership is its capacity to generate advances in science and translate them into entirely new products, processes, and services. To underscore the point, America’s lead is widest in those industries in which innovation is based on relatively recent scientific advance, such as pharmaceuticals, microprocessors, and software.

Historically, this source of global competitive advantage is new. Although commercial and industrial innovation have played an important part in determining world economic leadership since at least the opening of the Age of Exploration and surely since the first Industrial Revolution, innovation based on recent scientific advance emerged as a major economic force only in the second half of the 20th century.

In fostering science-based innovation, the United States has drawn upon two national characteristics that have long been a source of advantage: the ready availability of capital and the relative absence of barriers to the formation of new firms. These institutional features help with the rapid translation of science into industrial practice. But the United States government also recognized, in the immediate aftermath of World War II, that public investment was essential to generate steady progress in basic science. Scientific discoveries are the foundation of industrial technology. But the economic consequences of these discoveries are rarely understood immediately and may take decades to be fully worked out. Thus, private firms have little incentive to undertake the long-term, unpredictable work of basic science. Government must take the lead.

A 1946 report established the framework for an unprecedented and heavily subsidized system in support of scientific research that secured and maintained American economic leadership. The system rested upon three principles that remain largely intact today. First, the federal government shoulders the principal responsibility for the financial support of basic science. Second, universities - rather than government laboratories, non-teaching research institutes, or private companies - are the primary institutions in which this government-funded research is undertaken. This ensures that scientists-in-training, even those who choose industrial rather than academic careers, are exposed to the most advanced methods and results of research. And, third, although the Federal budgetary process determines the total funding available for each of the various fields of science, most funds are allocated, not according to commercial or political considerations, but through an intensely competitive process of review conducted by independent scientific experts who judge proposals on their scientific merit alone.

This system of organizing science has been an extraordinary success. Over the past three decades the U.S. has been the source of about 35% of all scientific publications worldwide, and more than 60% of the world’s Nobel Prizes in science have been awarded to Americans or foreign nationals working in American universities. And it is clear that publicly funded basic science has been critical to technological innovation. A recent study prepared for the National Science Foundation found that 73% of the main science papers cited in industrial patents granted in the U.S. were based on research financed by government or nonprofit agencies and carried out in large part in university laboratories.

The deliberate decision to locate most fundamental research in universities rather than government laboratories or private research institutes has another equally significant benefit. It enables the next generation of scientists to receive its education and training from the nation’s best scientists, who are required to teach as they pursue their own research. This model of graduate education enhances both the creativity of students and the vitality of the research enterprise.

Some of these well-trained graduate students become professors after they complete their degrees and post-doctoral study, thus ensuring that the academic research engine is continually replenished with new, skilled scientists. But the many who enter industrial employment after graduation take with them invaluable assets-state-of-the-art knowledge obtained by working at the frontiers of science and experience with the most advanced research tools and equipment. They also take with them a particular way of thinking, a topic to which I turn next.

The Contribution of Liberal Education to Innovation and Economic Growth
The knowledge created by the enterprise of academic science is by no means the only contribution of American universities to industrial innovation and economic growth. By engaging students in intellectual inquiry, encouraging them to question received wisdom, developing their capacity to think independently, and fostering their problem-solving abilities, universities and colleges contribute to economic growth through their teaching as well as their research. And it is not only the education of industrial scientists and engineers that has an impact on economic performance, it is the education of all those engaged in the business sector-executives, entrepreneurs, financiers, and consultants alike.

Many successful companies deliver products or services based on technology or marketing channels that didn’t exist a decade or two ago. In such a world, knowledge of a given body of information is not enough to survive, much less thrive; students who aspire to leadership in business or government must have the ability to think critically and creatively, and to draw upon and adapt ideas to new environments.

The methods of undergraduate as well as much professional education used by America’s most selective and distinguished universities and liberal arts colleges are particularly well suited to prepare students for a changing world. Unlike most European and Asian universities, which require students to specialize early, America’s finest research universities and liberal arts colleges are committed to the “liberal education” of undergraduates. Liberal education exposes to students to a variety of subjects and perspectives, giving them intellectual breadth as well as the depth that comes from concentration in a single discipline. Its object is not to convey any particular content, but to develop certain qualities of mind: the ability to sift through information to extract what is useful, to ask questions, to think critically and independently. Just as the largest social benefits derive from scientific research that is driven by a wide-ranging curiosity rather than a particular commercial objective, so, I would argue, the largest social benefits derive from a pedagogy that enlarges the power of students to reason and think creatively rather than master a specific body of knowledge.

How is this accomplished in practice? Even as recently as the 1930s and 1940s, students copiously took notes on their professors’ lectures, memorized them, and then “recited” them back to the professor when called upon in class. Today, students cannot rely on a good memory to succeed in college. Although lectures are still used in many courses, students are not encouraged to recite back what they hear in class or read in a textbook. Instead, students are encouraged to think for themselves-to offer their own opinions and interpretations in classes, writing assignments, and examinations.

The participatory seminar is now a fundamental part of most undergraduate and graduate programs at America’s top universities and liberal arts colleges. The purpose of small seminars is to challenge students to articulate their views and defend them against classmates and the professor, who may disagree. The format forces them to reason through issues and to think for themselves, not just repeat what a professor has told them or what they have read. Often, these seminars are accompanied by in-depth research and writing assignments, where students are required to engage in independent study and write a paper articulating and defending their conclusions.

A distinctive emphasis on critical thinking produces graduates who are intellectually flexible and open to new ideas, graduates equipped with curiosity and the capacity to adapt to ever-changing work environments, graduates who can convert recently discovered knowledge into innovative new products and services. By producing thinking and engaged graduates capable of innovation, liberal education prepares students for the challenges that we can’t even imagine today, challenges we must address if we wish to continue to grow and prosper.

Recent Japanese Efforts to Reform Science Funding and University Governance
The reforms currently under way here have the potential to move Japan toward worldwide best practice, especially in the funding of basic scientific research. Since 2000, grant funding subject to competitive review has grown by 57%. And, at the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology (MEXT), the largest funder of university-based research, the process of awarding grants has been transformed to resemble more closely U.S. system of peer review. Centered in the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) since 1998, the Japanese approach to competitive research funding got off to a rocky start. Career public servants who were not themselves scientists controlled the process initially, and the reviewers were picked from a list of candidates nominated by academic societies. The results, reported in a 2003 study, were a dramatic skewing of grant recipients toward the most senior scientists, replicating the allocation produced by the traditional politics of the academy. Since one of the objectives of moving toward competitive review was to provide opportunity for young scientists to succeed strictly on the merits of their proposals, the JSPS system was quickly overhauled. Now government program officers are highly qualified scientists recommended by universities and research institutes, serving three year terms. And the process now draws its external reviewers from a database of those in the nation’s scientific community who have been most successful in winning grants and publishing papers.

Still, Japan has a long way to go. Only $4.4 billion, or 13%, of the government’s $34.1 billion spending on research is subject to competitive review. In the United States, 73% of government research funding is subject to competitive review.

Over time, changes in the system of funding basic science could have a substantial impact on Japan’s capacity for major science-based innovation in commercial products and services. But strengthening basic science alone is not enough to ensure success. The American experience suggests that two other factors are significant.

First, the Japanese financial system needs to have the flexibility to allow small, science-based start-up enterprises sufficient access to capital. According to a recent study, Japan ranks second to last among 27 OECD countries in venture capital investment as a percentage of GDP. And only 23% of Japan’s venture capital is directed toward the leading science-based sectors - communications, information technology, and biotechnology. By contrast, more than half of U.S. venture investment is in these sectors.

Second, Japan needs to consider whether it wishes to reform the pedagogical practices of its leading universities to encourage its future scientists and business leaders to be more independent and creative. Interestingly, China is already moving in this direction - at least in the education of its elites. Two of China’s leading universities have recently begun to abandon the completely specialized European model of undergraduate education in favor of the American model, with a year or two of general liberal arts education followed by concentration on a major subject. A larger number of China’s top universities have radically changed their hiring and promotion policies in an effort both to improve the quality of the faculty and to speed the rate at which the system absorbs younger scholars trained in the U.S. and familiar with its more open pedagogy. For the past two summers, the presidents and senior academic administrators from fourteen of China’s leading universities have attended a seminar at Yale where they have shown keen interest in understanding how teachers in the U.S. elicit participation in class discussion and stimulate independent thinking among their students.

The changes in the governance of national universities put in place last year provide an enhanced opportunity for Japanese universities to tackle the question of pedagogical reform. Under the new arrangements, with presidents selected by a board of directors divided between faculty and outsiders, the national universities will have considerably more flexibility to differentiate themselves from one another. Indeed, government funding will be tied to the success of each university’s performance as measured against its independently formulated strategic plan. Thus far, discussion of possible reforms under the new governance regime has given more attention to personnel policies and criteria for evaluating individual and institutional performance than to pedagogical reform. But liberating universities from conformity with national regulations has substantially reduced the barriers to such reform.

It remains to be seen whether the recent changes in research funding and university governance will significantly enhance Japan’s capacity to innovate. The reforms are moving in the right direction, and they have created the opportunity for a dramatic upgrade in the quality of scientific research and in the creativity of Japanese university graduates. Perhaps the challenge of China’s rise will spur Japan to achieve the full potential that is latent in the recent reforms. Only time will tell.
