Vice-Chancellor Chadha, Rector Arora, Rector Saxena, members of the administration, faculty, and student body of Jawaharlal Nehru University, and distinguished guests, I am honored to be with you this evening as we inaugurate a new partnership between JNU and Yale. This new program of sustained graduate student exchanges represents one of the great opportunities that I see for creating the global university for the future.

JNU has positioned itself as one of the premier universities in India and in Asia at a time when this country and this region are asserting increasing importance in global political and economic affairs. I admire that the faculty, students, and administrators of JNU see the necessity and the challenge to adopt a global perspective in order to achieve the excellence to which you have committed yourself. You are pursuing work that will benefit and involve not only India, but those of us around the world. The groundbreaking work in chemistry and physics being done by faculty in your School of Physical Sciences is advancing the borders of basic science. Your Centre for Biotechnology and your Special Centre for Molecular Medicine have undertaken work that promotes applications of science to plant biology and to the alleviation of a host of human illnesses.

JNU has also recognized that truly great universities bear a responsibility to be engaged partners in resolving the challenges faced by society. Faculty in your School of International Studies have been conducting legal reviews of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and faculty in your School of Social Sciences have been examining some of the most pressing challenges facing a rapidly evolving Indian society-child labor, caste and class conflicts, population growth, and the social implications of HIV and AIDS to name just a few. Your decision to establish a Centre for the Study of Law and Governance recognizes, as we have at Yale, that the enormous social, political, and economic changes of globalization require new ways of thinking about civic order and the transparency and accountability of public and private institutions. JNU clearly sees, as we do, the global dimensions of university citizenship in the twenty-first century.

Yale, like JNU aspires to be a comprehensive university. Within your nine schools and our Yale College, we share a tradition of the strongest programs for undergraduates in a wide range of fields. Our tradition calls on us to look for the most well-rounded young men and women and prepare them for leadership in all sectors of society: the current president of the United States, and indeed, four of the last six presidents of the United States are Yale graduates. In the last decade, Yale graduates have held the position of CEO of Federal Express, Coca Cola, and Proctor and Gamble; and we are proud that the current president of Pepsi, Indra Nooyi, a native of Chennai, is both a graduate and a current trustee of Yale.

The foundation for a global university must include strengths in the biological, physical, and medical sciences, and engineering because it seems inevitable that the creation of knowledge to benefit humankind will disproportionately occur in those fields in the decades ahead. Similarly, centers of excellence in engineering will play a vital role in leading major research universities in our country, which does not have your tradition of specialized institutes. To this end, we at Yale are committing $1 billion-or 5,000 crore Indian rupees-for investment in science, engineering, and medicine in this decade. A new biomedical engineering building and an additional chemistry research building will be completed within a year, and they are the first of a set of facilities totaling more than 40,000 square meters to build upon the 426,000 square meters already devoted to the sciences and medicine at Yale.

Yale may be better known for its programs in the humanities and the social sciences, but our current standing in science positions us well for advancement. We give Ph.D. degrees in twenty-eight fields of the sciences and mathematics; we invest in every Ph.D. student coming to Yale by giving them free tuition and a living allowance each year of at least $17,000 or 8.5 lakhs rupees. Over the course of graduate study, the typical student’s commitment from Yale total more than $190,000 or 95 lakhs rupees, not including the cost of health care benefits and other services provided to students.

Our science faculty are world leaders in their fields. In 2003, our Faculty of Engineering celebrated its 150th anniversary and the Institute of Science Information, the recognized citation index for scientific publications, noted that research by Yale engineering faculty was cited in more papers since 1996 than research produced by any other U.S. engineering program, including Harvard, MIT Cal Tech, and Stanford. As the study’s author remarked, “Even though Yale’s volume of papers in engineering may not be as high as some other schools, those papers, pound-for-pound, tend to wield a high influence in the research community.” Our chemistry department also held the highest citation rating of any U.S. chemistry department since 1997. Other departments in the biological and medical sciences are similarly recognized as among the leaders in the quality of their research output.

Building upon the foundation of Yale’s strength in the biomedical sciences, we have spun off twenty-five regional biotechnology firms in the past decade, seventeen of them located within the city limits. Our city, New Haven, is becoming a major center for science-based industry.

The importance of scientific and medical discovery to the advancement of the world makes attention to these subjects almost a prerequisite for building the best global universities for the future.

This evening, I would like to sketch other aspects of a framework for global universities and to share some of the ways Yale is pursing this aspiration.

To be one of the world’s best universities fifty years from now, it will not be sufficient to excel in the humanities, the fine arts, the social sciences and the law; we will need to be among the very best in science and technology. And so we are moving forward. A $175 million medical research building opened in 2003, a new environmental science center opened in 2002, and last year, we began construction of new buildings for chemistry and biomedical engineering. And, as we hoped, our well-publicized commitment to upgrading and expanding our science facilities has already enabled us to recruit scientists of a caliber that has raised envious eyebrows at MIT and Stanford.

With the firm base of a comprehensive university, as we define it, let me turn to sketching the components for a global university.

The globalization of the university is in part an evolutionary development. Yale has drawn students from outside the United States for nearly two centuries, and international issues have been represented in its curriculum for the past hundred years and more. And your university since its inception has had international aspirations. Reflecting Pandit Nehru’s vision and ideals, the government act that established JNU in 1969 called for “international understanding” as an objective of the institution that bears his name.

But creating the global university is also a revolutionary development-signaling distinct changes in the substance of teaching and research, the demographic characteristics of students and scholars, the scope and breadth of external collaborations, and the engagement of the university with new audiences.

Let me touch in turn upon each of these four aspects of globalizing the university.

Teaching and Research
When I speak of becoming a global university, I envision a curriculum and a research agenda permeated by an awareness that political, economic, social, and cultural phenomena in any part of the world can no longer be fully understood in isolation. The revolution in communications technology has brought the world closer together and changed the way we think about it.

The term “globalization” is much used these days, although we have yet to disentangle entirely its multiple meanings. In one sense, globalization refers to economic interdependence. The movement of capital across national borders is now instantaneous, and the movement of products, people, and, unfortunately, pollution is freer and faster than ever before. These facts make comprehensive governance of the economy impossible at the level of the nation-state. International institutions are needed to regulate trade, capital flows, and environmental degradation. Isolation is not an option.

In another sense, globalization refers to the instantaneous transmission of ideas and images. Cross-cultural influences have always been with us, but today they are more powerful because of their immediacy. Because we access the same web sites, radio and television broadcasts, many fear a growing homogenization of cultures and values.

The incipiency of a common “global” culture has precipitated, in many parts of the world, a defensive reaction to protect “local” values, heightening tensions among neighboring ethnic, religious, and cultural groups.

Yale is well prepared to meet the challenge of understanding these developments. We offer over 600 courses on international topics, and the Yale Center for International and Area Studies sponsors programs of teaching and research focused on each of the world’s major regions. We regularly teach 50 languages and offer independent study in 30 others, and through the Center for Language Study, we are serving better those students whose primary interest is to develop fluency in speaking, rather than to master the classics of a national literature. Sanskrit has been taught continuously at Yale since the early 1840s, when Yale became the first university in the Western Hemisphere where Sanskrit could be studied; students today can engage in the regular study of Hindi, Sanskrit, and Tamil, and in the independent study of Bengali, Nepali, Urdu, and other South Asian languages.

The University’s South Asian Studies Council promotes the University’s teaching and scholarship on all aspects of South Asia and its diasporas. Drawing on faculty from across the University, the Council’s members annually offer dozens of courses on the humanities, social sciences, and languages of South Asia. Students at all levels of the University may take courses on the cultures, economics, histories, politics, religions, and other aspects of the region. Some students focus their studies entirely on India in inspired ways, as one Yale College student recently developed a concentration on South Asian Studies focused on Indian theater.

Yale’s burgeoning interests in South Asian Studies have been dramatic. Since 2000, more than 1,000 students have enrolled in South Asian Studies courses and just this past year alone, nearly forty students undertook research, study, work, or public service in South Asia. The South Asian Studies Council regularly organizes lectures, conferences, and performances on Yale’s campus. This past year saw international conferences on the changing role of language in nineteenth- and twentieth-century South India; the place of Gandhi’s politics in the contemporary world; and the future of secularism.

I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge that South Asian Studies at Yale over the past decade has flourished because of the generosity and vision of Yale graduates such as Dinakar Singh ‘90 and Drs. Vinod ‘75 and Anil ‘80 Rustgi. It has been sustained also by the leadership of my distinguished colleague T. N. Srinivasan and by the dedication of Dr. Pravin Bhatt, a highly renowned animal virologist at our medical school.

A global university can be built upon this strong foundation of individual dedication and vision, but the superstructure must encompass new forms as well as old. Because the world’s problems cannot be neatly compartmentalized into traditional academic categories, we have seen a flowering of interdisciplinary programs, such as the Center for Law and Environmental Policy, the International Institute for Corporate Governance, and the Center for Interdisciplinary Research on AIDS as well as the Center for the Study of Globalization

Students and Scholars
Just as building a global university requires us to expand our curriculum and refocus our research, it also requires us to ask whom are we educating and for what purpose?

1,708 international students from 105 different countries are enrolled in Yale academic programs this year; in other words, over 15% of the University-wide student body this year is neither a U.S. citizen nor a permanent resident.

In the science departments of our Graduate School, over one-third of our students come from abroad, and the Forestry and Environmental Studies and Management Schools are close behind. The last decade has seen an overall increase of more than 25% in the number of international students. Yale currently has 99 students from India, a total exceeded only by China, Canada, and Korea. They join the nearly three hundred other students on Yale’s campus who are of South Asian heritage. In addition, nearly two hundred faculty and scholars are of South Asian heritage or are working on South Asian issues.

India has changed dramatically since 1892 when Sumantro Vishnu Karmarkar from Ahmednagar, one of Yale’s earliest students from India, graduated from the University. Yale has an impressive roster of distinguished alumni in India. We are proud that our graduates can be found across the spectrum of government, business, science and academia. For example, your Finance Secretary, Dr. Rakesh Mohan, graduated from Yale College in 1971. Yale is well represented in academia with numerous professors and scientists, and prominent Yale graduates are rising captains of business and industry throughout this country.

Even with our ties in India, Yale College has historically had a very small complement of international students. When I became president, only one out of 50 students in the College was neither a U.S. nor Canadian citizen. Now it is one in thirteen, which ensures that most U.S. citizens in the College now have international students among their closest friends.

Our commitment to make Yale a more international community on campus is demonstrated by our new admissions policy to admit international students to Yale College on exactly the same basis as we admit U.S. citizens. That is, we admit students without regard to their ability to pay and offer the full financial assistance that they need to attend. This new policy is having a profound effect on our ability to attract undergraduates from many countries around the world. For example, outstanding students from families with limited financial means can attend Yale with generous financial support. During this current academic year, Yale will give nearly $700, 000 or 3.5 crore rupees in scholarships just to students attending Yale College from India. The average scholarship given to a student attending Yale College from India will be nearly $32,000 per student per year or nearly 16 lakhs rupees. Looking to all students from India at Yale, we will give students scholarships and stipends totaling more than $3.2 million dollars or 16 crore Indian rupees.

Not only are we providing generous financial aid for full-time students in residence at Yale, but we also are increasing the resources available for overseas study and exchange visits. To coordinate these resources we established the Office of International Education and Fellowship Programs in Yale College and enhanced the grants and fellowships opportunities offered by the Yale Center for International and Area Studies.

And it is not only international students who are changing the face of Yale, but also the visiting international scholars who come to campus to assume research and teaching responsibilities, to collaborate with colleagues or to observe in laboratory, classroom or clinical settings. Their numbers have more than doubled in a decade. We had over 1,750 international scholars on campus this past year, 112 of whom are from India. Only China, Germany, and Japan had more.

Increasing the number of students and scholars welcomed in the regular admissions process contributes to a global university. But an aspect of accelerating its advancement we inaugurate tonight with the new Joseph Fox ‘38 International Fellowships Program that will formally join Yale and JNU. Yale graduate Joseph Fox had a vision for a set of the world’s leading universities that would be linked with an ongoing program in which one or two graduate students from Yale would regularly study at the host campus abroad and that same university would have the funds to send one or two of its leading graduate students to Yale. In this way, a deep network of association between institutions would grow.

I hope that some of you here will be interested in applying as the first Fox Fellows to study at Yale.

International Collaborations
I have discussed how the creation of a global university will affect on-campus teaching and research, as well as the number and type of students we educate. But an equally powerful impetus for change will come from increased opportunities to collaborate with other institutions. The true global university will not establish satellites of its own, but rather create partnerships with leading universities and non-governmental organizations in key locations around the world.

Let me offer you three examples-two from India and one from China. Faculty at the Yale School of Public Health have been working in many countries around the globe to address the pandemic of AIDS and have projects underway with partners in Russia, South Africa, and China. Last year, the Center for Interdisciplinary Research on AIDS at the Yale School of Public Health received a $2.1 million grant from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to support HIV prevention research among high-risk populations in India. The Yale team that includes Dr. Michael Merson, who has served as dean of public health for the last decade, is not going it alone. Rather, it is collaborating with international humanitarian organizations such as CARE and with Indian institutions in Pune and Chennai. Later this week, I will be visiting the team’s facilities in Chennai that are closely collaborating with the Tamil Nadu State AIDS Control Society (TANSACS) and the Y. R. Gaitonde Centre for AIDS Research and Education headed by Dr. Suniti Solomon, who is well-known to many of you.

Let me offer you a second example of the kind of sustained international collaboration that I envision. Picture walking on the campus of Peking University. You will see today a building with exterior signage that reads the “Yale-Peking Joint Center for Plant Molecular Genetics and Agricultural Biotechnology.” At this center, Yale and Chinese faculty and graduate students are using genetic technologies to increase crop production. Scientists from the center come regularly to New Haven to build on the collaboration.

We look forward to building similar joint research endeavors with institutions in India in the years ahead.

In fact, on Thursday, I will be in Chennai at the dedication ceremony for the new campus of the Great Lakes Institute of Management. Yale School of Management Professor Shyam Sunder, who is also with us this evening, will serve as its honorary research director and will pursue joint teaching and research collaborations in accounting and finance. We look forward to conversations with colleagues here and at other leading institutions for other joint endeavors.

New Audiences
The same advances in communications technology that have created the phenomenon we call globalization offer substantial opportunities for the global university to expand its educational mission. The Yale web site already contains many audio and video reproductions of lectures and conferences that have taken place on our campus, but we have only begun to tap the potential of the Internet to provide valuable on-line learning experiences for students around the world.

To this end, Yale has joined with Oxford and Stanford Universities in an alliance to develop on-line educational materials. Our joint venture is called AllLearn.org and is found under that name on the Web. Some of our offerings approximate a conventional university “course” in the arts and sciences, but we are also experimenting with offerings of different duration and format. Last fall we had 50 courses available, and we now are making our on-line curriculum available to students and adult learners worldwide.

In Fall 2002, the Center for the Study of Globalization began publishing an on-line journal-YaleGlobal-whose editor, your countryman, Nayan Chanda, the Director of Publications at the Globalization Center, is with us this evening. The YaleGlobal journal’s web site (www.yaleglobal.yale.edu) now receives more than 60,000 visitors a day, and many of its articles have been reprinted in major international publications, such as the International Herald Tribune, the Straits Times, and the South China Morning Post.

The Yale World Fellows Program
Before closing, let me describe one last program that defies simple classification because it is at once a new teaching program involving a new group of international students, and it will also provide a basis for new international collaborations and help us to reach new audiences. I refer to the new Yale World Fellows Program, which, along with the Globalization Center, occupies Betts House, the splendidly renovated mansion at the top of Prospect Street hill.

The Program brings 15 to 20 emerging leaders representing all sectors of society and all regions of the world to campus to study global problems under the tutelage of our most distinguished professors. The program encourages the Fellows to broaden their horizons, and to develop new skills and contacts that will serve them and their countries upon their return home. We envision regular reunions of all the Fellows, which we hope will create a network of world leaders who can draw upon one another’s strengths as their careers develop and who will stay connected to Yale.

Past Yale World Fellows from India have included Chetna Gala-Sinha and Celine D’Cruz, both heads of non-governmental organizations, and the current Yale World Fellow, Nachiket Mor, the Executive Director of ICICI Bank.

In closing, I hope that I have offered some insights that might be of application to JNU as you continue your work to become a global university. I remain steadfastly committed to the ideal that we live in a wider world beyond the university walls, a world in which we bear enormous responsibility. The university stands for transcendent principles, those that permit the preservation of culture and the transmission of knowledge. It follows that our responsibility is to educate and to lead, to shape the values of the wider world so that they, too, encourage, the full realization of human potential. We help influence our society through the highly visible and distinguished leaders we educate, and we also improve public life and public discourse by cultivating in all of our students those qualities of mind most conducive to the health of our democracy. As we look at the problems of the world-wars, human misery, disease, intolerance, and oppression-we see even more clearly the need for the leading universities to help educate those who can become not simply contributors to their nation, but citizens of the world. That can be a noble mission joining our universities.
