 I am honored to be here today, to participate in the dedication of the Harold and Libby Ziff Center for Jewish Life at Stanford. The entire Jewish community of Stanford-including those of us who are alumni or parents-has cause for celebration, as we inaugurate this place of worship, study, reflection, and conversation. Those responsible deserve our heartfelt thanks.
Given my many connections to Stanford, which I will enumerate in a few minutes, I am especially pleased to be here. But I am not at all certain that I am qualified to be your keynote speaker. Some of you might think that my religious education was insufficient. Let me explain.
When I was growing up in San Francisco, my family belonged to Congregation Sherith Israel, which held services in a beautiful Romanesque synagogue on California Street. During services-that seemed to me to go on for a very long time-my brother and I did not always give the devoted attention we might have to the prayers or to the Rabbi’s teachings. Instead, we would stare up at the dome, which was encircled by a single row containing a great many light bulbs. We used to occupy ourselves by counting the lights. I can tell you even today that there were 67. Although yesterday I checked this number with my brother and he insists that there were 66.
You might think that by counting light bulbs I wasted my opportunity for religious education. But I’m not so sure. Just above the ring of lights written around the dome in the archaic and politically incorrect language of the old Union Prayer Book was this one sentence from the prophet Micah (6:8): “It hath been told thee, O Man, what is good, and what the Lord doth require of thee: only to do justice, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.”
Had my religious education taught me nothing more than this, Dayenu, it would have been enough. These words of the prophet are at the heart of Judaism. Justice, compassion, and humility-these aspirations define the behavior that is the essence of a good life. They are principles by which we should guide our lives. I trust that everyone assembled here would agree, and we are fortunate that this new center will provide for all of you a place to study and reflect, and to test ideas against fellow students and teachers.
The presence of this Center is another of those pleasant surprises arising, ultimately, from the opening of our leading universities to greater diversity in the 1960s. When I entered Stanford in 1964, there weren’t many Jewish students. There weren’t many Jews on the faculty either. I don’t know if the official statistics confirm this, but my impression is that the number of Jewish students at Stanford began to grow precisely during the years I attended. I do know that Yale dropped its Jewish quota in 1963, and I’d be surprised if Stanford were more than a couple of years behind.
At least Stanford, thanks to the farsightedness of its founders, admitted women students from the very beginning, unlike most of its Ivy League counterparts. Still, many of you would be surprised to learn that in my day the gender balance of the undergraduate population was the opposite of Jan and Dean’s Surf City. There were two boys for every girl.
We do know this for sure. The 1960s began a process of dramatic and irreversible change in the composition of the student body and faculties of the most selective American universities. At Stanford, as at Yale and throughout the Ivy League, the presence of previously underrepresented racial, religious, and ethnic groups increased markedly, and a roughly 50-50 gender balance was obtained. Today we are witnessing a similar opening up of undergraduate education to a more diverse array of international students.
I mention the impressive and growing diversity of this campus for two reasons. First, although it may have taken Stanford three-quarters of a century, today it is an institution in which the content of one’s character, to paraphrase Dr. Martin Luther King, matters more than the color of one’s skin or the nature of one’s beliefs. As we scan the globe, from China to the Sudan to Rwanda, we should be thankful every day for what America gives us-the freedom to create great institutions like this university that are open and inclusive, and the freedom, within such institutions, to associate with those who share our beliefs. The Ziff Center is the product of these freedoms, and it is evident from merely perusing your web site that you are taking full advantage of them-with classes affording the opportunity to study not only Judaism’s sacred texts but its cultural traditions, with worship services, social events, and outreach programs that provide students with an opportunity to “do justice.”
Second, I mention the diversity of this campus because it symbolizes not only our freedom but also our responsibility. This new home gives us, as Jews, an opportunity to strengthen the bonds that unite us as a community, to deepen our understanding of our faith and our traditions. But we must not wall ourselves off from the larger, more diverse community that surrounds us. To segregate ourselves would be to deny ourselves the most effective instrument of education and personal development-the encounter with difference. As students and faculty members we learn most and grow most rapidly when we are challenged to understand, to appreciate, and define ourselves in relation to those whose ideas and beliefs differ from our own. In this sense, the diversity of the larger Stanford community is a treasure house of learning opportunities. If we wish to learn, to grow, and to realize our full potential as Jews, as citizens, as human beings, we must seize these opportunities. It is our responsibility to engage with those least like us, to encounter difference, and through the understanding of difference better to discover ourselves.
Harold Bloom teaches us, in his brilliant little book entitled How to Read and Why, that the encounter with difference is the essence of how one learns from reading fiction, poetry, and drama. Professor Bloom focuses on works of the imagination, but I learned long ago, as a Stanford undergraduate, that serious engagement with great works of history, biography, and autobiography achieves the same result in the same way. Each of these forms permits the reader to encounter otherness-the independent consciousness of the poet, the fully developed characters of the great novelist or biographer, the richly drawn world of another time and place in which history unfolds. To give just one example, if we wished to understand the struggle between personal ideals and the necessity of practical action, we would be well served by studying either Tolstoy’s portrayal of Pierre Bezuhov or the life and writings of Abraham Lincoln. By seriously engaging with the text, literary or historical, we both encounter difference, enlarging our own sphere of experience, and we find a common humanity.
As a freshman in Wilbur Hall, I learned from my resident assistant, that this lesson applies to people as well as texts. My R.A.-we called them “sponsors” in those days-read people like books. He had an extraordinary ability to grasp and to articulate the essential and differentiating features of each person he came to know. He was a student of human behavior, vitally interested in learning everything he could about other people. It wouldn’t be fair to say that he was non-judgmental, because he examined every one with a discerning eye, but he relished, almost indiscriminately, every one’s individuality and idiosyncrasies. In some ways, he seemed to relish most those whose behaviors were most extreme-from the terrified grind who pulled twice-weekly all-nighters to the exuberant young man, later to become a distinguished medical ethicist, who repeatedly filled our dresser drawers with shaving cream, flooded the hallway with barrages of water balloons, and occasionally hung dead snakes on doorknobs. But, ultimately, my R.A. valued most those people who had the self-knowledge and courage to define themselves by their own lights and stake out an independent course. And, to get back to the point, he taught me by example that by reaching out to understand and to identify with others, we discover and refine our own values and beliefs. We learn about ourselves; we learn to build our own lives.
Let me end on a personal note, addressed to the students who are here today.
What I learned in my journey through Stanford was that I wanted a life in which learning was never-ending and a life that would allow me the opportunity to serve, to “do justice,” in some significant way. I’ve been very fortunate. I’ve had the opportunity to transform a great American institution, preserving its core values while turning it outward to engage with the problems of the city around it and the wider world.
I have been privileged to test Stanford from many perspectives-as a student, an alumnus, a professional colleague of fellow economists, a parent of three undergraduates, a parent of a young member of the faculty, and as president of a rival institution. Stanford passes each test with banners waving overhead.
Stanford has unique virtues. After 113 years, it clings to all that is best about the American West. The restless spirit of the frontier survives; the winds of freedom blow. Independence, innovation, and entrepreneurship are prized. Openness and curiosity are cultivated. Stanford is an invitation to self-discovery. It was for me. It gave me a running start. I hope it will do the same for each of you.
Mazel tov, to one and all, on this great occasion. Enjoy your new home.
 