Chairman Qin, President Wang, honored guests, faculty, students, staff, alumni, and friends. It is an honor to bring greetings on behalf of the many universities represented here. It is a particular honor to do so in the presence of Chairman Wu Bangguo, State Councilor Chen Zhili, and Minister Zhou Ji so that important leaders of China will hear first hand the high regard in which Fudan is held by universities around the world. Fudan’s 100th birthday takes on special significance at a time when China is focused on elevating its finest universities, at a time when Fudan’s ambition to expand, innovate, and excel is inspiring to all of us who are privileged to have Fudan as a partner.

This is my third visit to this campus in four years, and I continue to find its progress remarkable. President Wang, you and your colleagues are quite literally building the university of the future. It begins with investment in facilities on a vast scale, both on the old campus and on an entire new campus in the making, with state-of-the-art scientific laboratories, attractive student residences, and new spaces for academic and administrative services. But facilities alone cannot create excellence; they are a foundation for it. Upon that foundation Fudan is strengthening its faculty, launching more than ten major research initiatives, and inaugurating Fudan College for undergraduates. Even without massive investment in facilities, these program enhancements would be cause enough for celebration.

The university presidents gathered today represent only a fraction of the institutions of higher education that see Fudan as an important partner in pursuing their global ambitions. Increasingly Fudan is a partner of choice, whether it is a joint bachelors program with University College-Dublin, an executive MBA program with Washington University-St. Louis, joint masters programs with the University of Sydney and Waseda University, student exchange programs with the National University of Singapore, the Salzburg University-EU summer program, or a new Bioscience Center with the University of Nottingham. The Fudan-Yale connections include a Fudan undergraduate program on the Yale campus and a joint Biomedical Research Center here. I mention these projects to reinforce the importance of two-way avenues of institutional affiliation; those of us outside China are benefiting from Fudan coming to our campus even as we embrace participating in joint projects here. Fudan is a leader in recognizing the advantages of mutually beneficial arrangements.

President Wang’s recounting of the early history of Fudan makes clear another reason why I am so delighted to offer this greeting: Yale’s connection to Fudan spans the entire century. It was Yale graduate Li Denghui, Yale College Class of 1899, who was recruited by Fudan’s founder Ma Xiengbo to be the first Fudan Director of Studies in 1905. Later, he served as the University’s first President from 1913 to 1936. As if this deep connection were not enough, Yan Fuqin, the founder of Shanghai Medical University, now Shanghai Medical College of Fudan University, received his M.D. degree from Yale in 1909.

It is intriguing to note how consonant some of Li Denghui’s goals and practices were with those of Fudan today. He championed a wide-ranging scope of instruction covering mathematics and science, language, literature, rhetoric, anthropology, geography and philosophy, among other subjects. Li Denghui advocated a course of general education for undergraduates, at least for the initial years of a student’s study. And foreshadowing Fudan’s current commitment to globalization, he had Fudan offer its earliest students foreign language instruction in German, French and English. Academic innovation became Fudan’s hallmark. Fudan was one of the earliest universities to pioneer in the field of journalism and to expand the field of study in its college of law.

What should we expect as Fudan enters its second century? No one can predict the future with confidence, but let me suggest my hope for Fudan’s future, and for the future of all the leading universities from around the world who have representatives here today.

My hope is that the work of leading international universities will be, and will be perceived to be, essential - not peripheral - to the progress of humanity and to global stability and security. Already, the university’s role as an engine of economic growth is well recognized. One only needs to look at the companies created around Fudan and the patents achieved from research in your laboratories to appreciate how universities contribute directly to economic growth.

But direct economic benefits to a nation are only a modest part of what universities can accomplish for the larger welfare of humanity, in China and around the world. The research of your faculty will lead to important advances in human health, and to discoveries that will improve the quality of life. Within the past month, the Yale-Fudan partnership in biomedical research has produced a highly efficient new technique for identifying the effect of mammalian genes, a technique that should help to identify the cause of many diseases and abnormalities. This kind of work of the university knows no national borders.

I would further maintain that the web of educational and scholarly exchange that is being woven by Fudan as it enters its second century may prove to be as important as the benefits provided by its research. As we enter a world of global interdependence, connections among universities can become important forces for stability and international security. Political and economic events will inevitably strain relations among governments from time to time, but student-to-student and researcher-to-researcher linkages deepen mutual understanding and create an enduring foundation for cooperation among those who are or will become influential voices in their home countries.

China has long understood that higher education is a civilizing force; it guides students and scholars to seek truth and to develop the fullest expression of their human potential. Fudan’s first president, Li Denghui, passed on this wisdom to his students:

“Knowledge is not an end in itself, nor is it [only] a means of further[ing] the larger or material ambitions of man… It is a means by which we may be guided into the path of truth… “

On behalf of the world’s universities, I offer heartfelt congratulations to Fudan University as it begins a second century in pursuit of the most noble goals humanity.
