Judge Downey, Representatives of the Class of 1951, Veterans, Cadets, Ladies and Gentlemen:

Good morning!

I rise after this stirring music, on this day of commemoration, to join those of you who have come from far and near to pay tribute to the Yale graduates who have served our country over three centuries, and to honor one special man whose courage and character are emblematic of the enduring spirit of them all.

Our ceremony today corresponds to ceremonies held in Washington, and around this country, linking Americans in a powerful chain of remembrance.

In gathering, we pause to remember that our fortunate lives owe much to the sacrifice of those who have fought to preserve our freedom. Our gathering is a small reminder that freedom itself is never free from challenge by those who would deny it to others.

It is especially apt to recognize sacrifice in the nation’s service here at Yale. From the beginning, Yale College was meant to be a place where, in the words of our 1701 charter: “youth may be instructed and fitted for Publick employment both in Church and civil state.”

Service and sacrifice require character, and thus this ceremony takes on special significance because Yale is an educational institution devoted to the formation of character. Here education has always meant more than the training of the intellect alone. Here we inculcate in students not mere facts, not merely the “furniture of the mind” noted by President Day in 1828, but also those “intangibles” developed through living and working in a highly engaged community, a community that confronts students with choices about how to live, requires them to discover their own values, and shapes their character.

Many of you on this quadrangle today have served our country with distinction. The rest of us can only imagine the ordeals you veterans have faced, or those you cadets may face, or what the Yale veterans, remembered here by the Alumni War memorial and the tablets of the Rotunda, had to confront in their own dark nights of the soul.

Today we honor one special person, a friend of mine, a classmate to many of you, whose story helps us to understand the ordeal, the patriotism, the humility, and the contribution of all who have served this country.

Jack Downey has always insisted that his risk-taking efforts over Northeast China were the efforts of a man merely doing his duty. He has preferred to give the impression that his response to capture, trial, condemnation, and incarceration in alien territory, under difficult and isolating circumstances, would have been the response of any American.

Maybe he is right. I wish it were so. But I’m not so sure. And I know that the nearly 100 members of the Class of 1951 here today to honor Jack share my skepticism. Because the character that Jack revealed in twenty years of imprisonment is the same character that we’ve seen ever since in the conduct of his life and in his attitude towards his experience. There aren’t many who measure up.

The easily observed facts, known to many of you, are that after his release Jack went to the Harvard Law School, married Audrey Lee (whom he met on a return visit to Yale), and built a distinguished career of service as a juvenile court judge. When the new Juvenile Courthouse in New Haven was named for him, it was said that “He has truly altered for the good the future of countless children unable to help themselves.”

No less impressive than his life of public service has been the way Jack has regarded his twenty-year ordeal. He has always refused, as he puts it, to “[go] through life making a career out of being a CIA agent who was imprisoned in China.” When praised, he responds with humility. When honored, he deflects applause with self-deprecation and humor. He never speaks with bitterness or recrimination towards his captors. He never complains about his lost years. He has never sought special privilege or advantage. And he has never assumed that in giving so much to his country, he deserved anything in return.

Instead, he has lived as if his experience in captivity gave him a special gift of sympathy that was meant to put in the service of others.

This is how Jack Downey’s character has shown itself through his actions and his attitude, and it has made the difference to those around him. His resilience, his courage and his perspective towards his experience inspire us to make more of our own lives.

On accepting the Nobel Prize, William Faulkner said: “I believe that man will not merely endure. He will prevail. He is immortal, not because he alone among creatures has an inexhaustible voice, but because he has a soul, a spirit capable of compassion and sacrifice and endurance.”

It is this soul, this spirit capable of compassion, sacrifice and endurance, that we honor in all those who have answered the call to service - and most especially in the man we have chosen to represent our nation’s veterans on this special day.

As he steps up here to join us, may I ask you all to salute Jack Downey.

Jack, this year we have celebrated the 250th anniversary of the birth of another Yale man who served our nation with courage and character, a man whose name is known to every American and whose statue graces the old campus. You and he are kindred spirits. Just as his example has mattered to so many generations, your example matters to us.

And so it gives me such great pleasure to present you with this replica of our statue of another distinguished son of Yale, Nathan Hale.
