Good evening. And welcome one and all. What a fabulous day this has been!

I want to begin by thanking the marvelous and talented members of our faculty who made presentations today, who gave you all a taste of the excitement of their subjects: ranging from the art and music to biomedical engineering, from American foreign policy to women’s health. Would all those who made presentations today please rise so that we can let you know how much we appreciate your work?

Putting together an event like this is a very big job. I know that you will want to join me in thanking Vice President Inge Reichenbach and her fabulous team for their meticulous planning and brilliant execution.

Today’s lectures were intended to remind us of what we are about - the endless quest for a better and deeper understanding of nature and culture, the challenge of encountering new ideas and learning to think for oneself. To guide us on this quest, we are blessed with more than our share of the world’s greatest scholars and teachers. How fortunate are the students who get the daily benefit of their knowledge, their commitment, and their passion.

We are gathered here tonight to launch the Yale Tomorrow campaign, in the fourteenth year of my presidency. All those who were my counterparts at America’s leading institutions when I began have returned to their scholarship or retreated to the relative quiet of running a foundation or professional organization. Yet I’m still at it, and I’ll tell you why. Because this is a time of enormous opportunity for Yale.

Your support has enabled us to do so much. We have literally rebuilt this campus over the past thirteen years, treating its magnificent architecture with the respect that it deserves. We have transformed the city of New Haven from a liability into an asset - with a thriving downtown that is cleaner, safer, and filled with new shops and restaurants. And, finally, after years and years, the world is beginning to understand what most of us in this room have known for a long time - that Yale College offers the finest, richest, deepest undergraduate educational experience in the world.

Yet there remains so much more to do. Now we are in the midst of another great transformation – transforming the Yale that was once a tiny college for the Connecticut colony into a truly global institution, serving not only America but the world. The revolution in communications technology has brought the world closer together, heightening the potential for cultural conflict even as national economies become more interdependent. Never before in human history has it been so important to understand one another. And here Yale is leading the way, demonstrating to our peers that universities are capable of building bridges of mutual understanding more durable than governments could ever build. Ensuring that all Yale students have an overseas experience during their time here is not only an investment in their futures, it is an investment in the future harmony of the planet.

Let me make the point even more concretely. Last week, I was privileged to attend a meeting in Washington involving President Bush and Madam Chen Zhili, a member of China’s highest governmental body, the State Council, who has sponsored many of our most successful programs in China. At one point in the conversation, President Bush remarked: “Because of the efforts of schools like Yale, when our successors, the leaders of America and China, meet thirty years from now, they will have worked or studied in each other’s country. It will make a huge difference.”

Yale’s contribution to the future of the planet goes beyond the education of its leaders. From the life sciences to nanotechnology to the study of the environment, today’s Yale has the capacity to make discoveries that will enhance dramatically the quality of human life. We must invest heavily in science, medicine, and engineering to ensure that Yale remains at the forefront. At the same time, we must ensure that the global citizens we educate - especially the large majority who don’t pursue careers in science, engineering, or medicine - develop a rigorous understanding of science and its role in society.

Yale is fortunate to have within its midst four superlative schools of fine arts and two world-class art museums. No other university has a comparable array of cultural treasures. Our schools of art, architecture, music, and drama not only help to define the standards of their respective crafts, they and our great museums enrich the campus for all of us - so that students in law, management, divinity, forestry, medicine, nursing, the graduate school and the college can deepen and broaden their education through attendance at exhibitions and performances. We need to invest in these fine but traditionally under-supported schools to ensure their continued leadership. And we need to expand the role played by the arts in the curriculum of Yale College.

The Yale Tomorrow campaign is organized around four central themes: the College, the sciences, the arts, and the world - each of which I have just touched on briefly. But I want to emphasize that this is a comprehensive university-wide campaign. We want to advance Yale’s excellent in every domain that you wish to support - from graduate education to our superlative libraries to scholarship in the social sciences and humanities, from athletics to the Peabody Museum to the environmental science and policy that is so crucial to our collective future. And, in all our schools, we want to make a Yale education accessible to the most talented and affordable for all.

And now we are ready for the official launch of the Yale Tomorrow campaign. A great enterprise requires great leadership. So, before I make my solemn declaration, I want to invite onstage those volunteer leaders who are helping to lead this noble effort.

First, please join me in welcoming and thanking our campaign co-chairs: Len Baker, Ed Bass, Josh Bekenstein, Roland Betts, and Susan Crown. They have been unfailing sources of good advice and counsel in mapping out our plans. And each of them has embraced this campaign with extraordinary enthusiasm and great personal generosity.

Next, I want to recognize Charley Ellis, for his special efforts in chairing the campaign for the School of Management. Despite being an alumnus of “that other business school,” Charley has been tireless in his dedication to SOM, helping to get the School off to a flying start, raising for its nucleus fund over the past two years more than ten times the amount ever raised in a single year.

Finally, I’d like to recognize the leaders of our Alumni Fund, which provides vital ongoing support in the form of unrestricted funds. These efforts will of course continue throughout the campaign. Bill Wright has led the Fund during the silent phase of the past two years, and Biff Folbreth has just recently assumed the reins.

And now, I am pleased and proud to announce the launch of the five-year public phase of the Yale Tomorrow campaign. Our goal is to raise a grand total of $3 billion.  (And those of you who know me know that we are unlikely to stop there!).

Over the past two years, we have worked quietly to enlist the support of some of Yale’s most generous supporters. This work has been rewarded by extraordinary gifts in support of all of our campaign priorities. With great pleasure, I am able to report to you that we have at this point received new gifts and pledges equaling 43% of our campaign goal. Or, to come right out and say it, with your magnificent support, we have raised a total of $1,304,000,000.

Through three centuries Yale’s achievements have been made possible by people like those gathered here tonight - graduates and friends whose generosity provides the resources to make continuous innovation and improvement a reality. I’m sticking with this job because I know that you will rally to the cause, that you will support Yale’s grand aspirations to serve the nation and the world through the advancement of knowledge and the education of leaders. This is our calling. Together we will shape a Yale even greater than the Yale of today. Together we will build Yale Tomorrow.

Thank you.

