Thank you President Moreno for your insightful opening remarks and for hosting today’s conference.

It is a privilege to have the opportunity to address this distinguished audience, filled as it is with an unusually diverse and accomplished group of leaders. Over the next several hours, you will explore the essential trends in the Americas today. Whether the focus is on macroeconomic developments or the fate of particular business sectors - such as the media and telecommunications, there is no doubt that the Americas cannot be understood in isolation from the rest of the world. The forces of globalization are being felt in every sector. It is my task this morning to illustrate for you how globalization is affecting higher education, and how in turn universities can be a positive influence, helping to turn the power of globalization in a constructive direction.

As never before in their long history, universities have become both instruments of national competition and instruments of peace. They are the locus of the scientific discoveries that move the economy forward, and the primary means of educating the talent required to obtain and maintain competitive advantage.

At the same time, the opening of national borders to the flow of goods, services, information, and especially people, has made universities a powerful force for global integration, mutual understanding, and geo-political stability. This tension is reflected in policy debates around the world.

University research as a driver of economic growth
Since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, technological change has been the principal source of economic growth and a rising standard of living. But most inventions that propelled the economy of the eighteenth, nineteenth and early twentieth century resulted from the efforts of individuals working in isolation, without the support of large-scale formal programs of research and development.

Only in the past half century has the pace of technological progress become dependent on recent advances in science and their translation to practice, a process that requires both public and private investment in research and development. In such an environment, governments have increasingly come to view universities as an instrument of national economic policy.

After the Second World War, the United States recognized that maintenance of its leadership in defense technology required substantial public investment in university-based science. As a result, by the mid-1950s the U.S. had developed an infrastructure for public support of university research across the full spectrum of basic sciences, as well as applied research in health, agriculture, defense, and energy. The major European countries followed suit, although they failed to recognize certain advantages of the U.S. system.

In Europe and the Soviet Union, too much research was concentrated in national institutes rather than universities, divorcing cutting-edge research from training the next generation of scientists and engineers. And most research funding was allocated by block grants to universities, rather than by the intensely competitive process of peer-reviewed grants to individuals, which helped boost the quality of U.S. science. As a result of its strength in science and active capital markets, the U.S. has consistently led the world in the commercialization of major new technologies as they emerge: from the mainframe computer and the integrated circuit of the 1960s to the personal computer and operating software of the 1980s to the Internet infrastructure and applications software of the 1990s.

The linkage between university-based science and industrial application is often indirect, but it is sometimes highly visible, as in the case of Silicon Valley, an intentional creation of Stanford University, and Route 128, long populated by companies spun-off from MIT and Harvard.

The model is taking hold in Latin America. Tec de Monterrey, surrounded by an impressive array of companies such as CEMEX, plays a key role in the developing cluster of technology companies in Jalisco, sometimes called the “Silicon Valley of Mexico.” At the University of Costa Rica, the Technological Institute created a Center for Enterprise Incubation in 1994 that provides infrastructure and services to ten firms in the area of food products, biotechnology, electronics, software, forestry services and chemical products. And in Brazil, the Technological Development Company (CODETEC), established at the State University of Campinas (UNICAMP) in 1978, was the first incubator project in a Brazilian academic institution. It had the explicit goal of creating the Brazilian version of the high-tech region around Stanford University and has encouraged new companies to commercialize research conducted on campus.

The University as a Force for Global Stability
Over the past three decades the number of students leaving their home countries each year for study abroad has grown at an annual rate of 3.9%, from 800,000 to 2,500,000. The principal flows have always been among developed countries with a substantial and growing flow from developing to developed countries. More recently, the flow from developed to developing countries has increased.

Today, foreign students earn 30% of the doctoral degrees awarded in the United States and 38% of those awarded in the United Kingdom. And the number crossing borders for undergraduate study is growing as well, to 8% of the undergraduates at Ivy League schools in the U.S. and 10% of all undergraduates in the U.K.

Since the first Latin American students begin arriving to study in the U.S. in the early 1800s, the number of students from the region has grown dramatically. Currently, there are 152 students from 18 Latin American countries at Yale, and we are extremely fortunate to have former Mexican President Ernesto Zedillo leading the Yale Center for the Study of Globalization. In addition, the University now offers an increasing number of options for students to study and work in the region, such as our new Bulldogs in Monterrey Internship Program.

In addition, the Yale Law School sponsors student exchanges with several universities in Argentina, Brazil, and Chile through its Linkages program. At workshops in Buenos Aires, Santiago and Saõ Paulo, these students focus on human rights issues and collaborate with local NGOs. Students in Argentina and Chile attend a faculty seminar that draws participants from the entire continent.

Naturally, the leaders of these and other student groups promoting international collaboration are in touch with each other daily via email and Skype, technologies that not only facilitate cooperative projects but also increase the likelihood that lifelong personal ties will be created.

The bottom line: the flow of students across national borders, students who are disproportionately likely to become leaders in their home countries, enables deeper mutual understanding, toleration, and global integration.

Responding to Globalization
Like business enterprises, universities everywhere are adapting to an interconnected world by becoming ever more self-consciously global. That students are recruited worldwide is only the starting point.

Universities also are encouraging increasing numbers of their domestic students to spend a portion of their undergraduate experience in another country. In Europe, more than 140,000 students participate in the Erasmus program each year, taking courses for credit in one of 2200 participating institutions across the continent. And in the United States, institutions are mobilizing their alumni to facilitate overseas placements of their students in summer internships in business or service organizations to prepare them for global careers. Yale and Harvard have led the way by offering at least one international study or internship opportunity abroad to every undergraduate and providing the financial resources to make this possible.

Just as globalization is redefining the educational programs of leading universities around the world, it also promises to reshape the way research is done. For example, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has a partnership with the Tec de Monterrey to stimulate collaboration between Mexico and the United States, as well as agreements with the Global Entrepreneurship Laboratories in Brazil and Uruguay to focus on innovative technologies.

Through its partnership in the Magellan Telescopes - located at the Las Campanas Observatory in Chile - Harvard University works with the Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile and the Universidad de Chile, as well as the University of Arizona, MIT, the University of Michigan and the Observatories of the Carnegie Institution of Washington.

The private sector, too, is playing an important role in this process. Via the IBM Latin American Grid Computing Initiative, faculty, students and researchers from the world-renowned IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Centers across the U.S., Latin America and Spain now collaborate on a wide range of projects. Potential applications stretch across key areas such as health care, life sciences and nano-technology. They also address regionally-specific concerns, such as hurricane mitigation.

Adopting and Adapting Global Best Practices
According to Newsweek’s recent ranking of global universities, eight of the world’s top ten universities are located in the United States. So it should come as no surprise that nations seeking to improve the quality of their universities are introducing elements of the U.S. research university model and adapting them to the local context.

A prime example is the Universidad de las Américas Puebla’s (UDLA) adoption of the residential college system, the first in Latin America. A time-tested institution at Oxford, Cambridge, and Yale, the residential colleges help UDLA better integrate students into the university, uniting the processes of living and learning. Similarly, residential colleges at the Universidad de Monterrey (UDEM) allow students to establish social and academic relationships with their peers and, most importantly, gain a strong sense of community.

Many North American universities also are sharing best practices - and learning from their Latin American counterparts - through joint educational and research programs, such as the recently renewed Yale-Universidad de Chile astronomy and astrophysics program. This program began in 1999 under the auspices of Yale, the Universidad de Chile, and the Andes Foundation. Yale astronomers and students have had access to the large and excellent telescopes in Chile, while graduate students at the Universidad de Chile have had access to theoretical training and facilities at Yale.

Public Policy and the University
In deciding whether to treat universities as instruments of national competitive advantage or forces for global integration, governments around the world have differed sharply.

Europe has embraced the idea that universities can be a source of regional if not global integration by focusing on easing barriers to the flow of students across nations within the EU. But, according to a recent devastating critique by Richard Lambert and Nick Butler, European governments have systematically weakened their top universities, once the pride of the world, by investing too little in research, spreading limited resources too thinly across too many institutions, expanding enrollments without commensurate increases in faculty, and refusing to allow universities sufficient autonomy. Without concentrating more resources in the hands of the strongest universities, or allowing these universities the opportunity to generate resources by charging tuition fees comparable to their U.S. counterparts (and, like them, awarding financial aid to those in greatest need), there is little hope that Europe’s universities will be a strong source of national competitive advantage.

Latin American institutions, by contrast, are investing in their top institutions and placing an emphasis on research, and the result has been enhanced by collaborations across the Americas.

Take the U.S.-Brazil Consortium for Environmental Studies. Originally funded by a federal grant in 2001, Northern Fluminense and the Amazonas Federal University in Brazil joined a consortium with Washington and Lee University and Fairfield University to study the relationship between the environment, economic development and quality of life. To cite another example, Tecnológico de Monterrey and Instituto Tecnológico de Sonora-ITSON are collaborating on environmental protection systems for the Sonoran desert region, as well as education and technology transfer for the aerospace industry.

Yet if Latin America is increasingly enthusiastic about both the competitive and integrative possibilities of universities, the United States remains deeply ambivalent.

Most politicians recognize the link between investment in science and the nation’s economic strength, but support for research funding has been fitful and sporadic rather than steady. The budget of the National Institutes of Health was doubled between 1998 and 2003, but given sub-inflationary increases since. Support for the physical sciences and engineering barely kept pace with inflation during the period the NIH budget grew - although legislation is now pending that would double these expenditures over the next ten years.

The attempt to make up lost ground is welcome, but the nation would be better served by steady, predictable increases in science funding at the rate of long-term GDP growth, which is on the order of inflation plus 3% per year.

American politicians have great difficulty recognizing the extent to which increasing the flow of students across borders promotes the national interest by increasing international understanding. Adjusted for inflation, public funding for international exchanges and the study of foreign languages is well below the levels that prevailed forty years ago.

In fact, in the wake of September 11, changes in the process of obtaining visas caused a dramatic decline in the number of foreign students seeking admission to U.S. universities, and a corresponding surge in enrollments in Australia, Singapore, and the U.K. Objections from university and business leaders led to improvements in the process and a reversal of the decline, but the U.S. is still seen in some regions as unwelcoming to international students. An abortive attempt last year by the Commerce Department to extend the scope of export control regulations in university research labs reinforced this unfortunate signal.

Most Americans recognize that universities contribute to the nation’s well being through their scientific research, but many fear that foreign students threaten American competitiveness by taking their knowledge and skills back home. They fail to grasp that welcoming foreign students to the U.S. has two overriding positive effects: (1) many of the very best stay here and strengthen the nation as immigrants have for its entire history, and (2) foreign students who study in the U.S. become ambassadors for many of its most cherished values when they return home. Or at least they better understand them. In the U.S. as elsewhere, few instruments of foreign policy are as effective in promoting a stable and peaceful world as welcoming international students to one’s universities.

That’s why universities across the Americas should be given every opportunity to attract the most talented students and engage in the most ambitious collaborations.
