 Prelude to Baccalaureate
Good morning. Before I begin my remarks, I want to ask the proud families and friends of our graduates to join those of us on the stage in offering warm congratulations to the Yale College Class of 2007.
And now I would like to ask the class of 2007 in turn to reflect for one moment on how you came to reach this milestone.
One of the things that may have occurred to you during that moment of reflection is that there are many people here today - your parents, siblings, relatives, and friends - whose support and encouragement made your achievements here possible. Let me suggest that you rise and show them your appreciation.
Baccalaureate Address: Journeys
Three years before you arrived here, on the eve of this university’s 300th birthday, we took the bold step of declaring that Yale would transform itself into a truly global institution in its fourth century. You and your successors deserve no less. Like your predecessors, you will lead lives of consequence, but unlike them, you enter a world that has become increasingly interdependent economically and geopolitically. The world, and not merely this nation, will be the stage on which your lives and your careers play out.
Many of you have been the beneficiaries of our recent efforts to internationalize the university. We have strengthened the curriculum in international studies and extended to international students our policy of awarding full need-based financial aid to all students admitted to Yale College. The year you were admitted, we announced our intention to offer to every undergraduate an overseas experience, and, a year later, we introduced a new financial aid program to ensure that every student would have sufficient resources to spend a term or summer abroad.
Today, the fruits of these initiatives surround us. Since the year 2000, we have added 47 new scholars in international studies to the Faculty of Arts and Sciences and the number of international applicants to Yale College has more than doubled. You are the first class in Yale’s history in which the number of nations represented equals the number of states of the union; you come from 50 nations and 50 states. And you are the first Yale class in which a majority took advantage of overseas study programs, independent research grants, or work internships.
Dean Salovey and I have just returned from an extraordinary journey to China. We led a delegation of 100 Yale students and faculty, invited by China’s President Hu Jintao as a gesture of friendship when he visited our campus a year ago. The invitation was no accident. Yale has a long association with China, dating back to 1850 when the first Chinese to study in a Western university enrolled in Yale College. And today we have the broadest and deepest set of collaborations and programs in China of any Western university.
On our first evening in Beijing, we were received by President Hu in the Great Hall of the People and treated to an exquisite banquet. In the days that followed, the Yale 100 met with top government officials, visited four universities, dined with families, explored a rural village, and saw many of China’s most significant historical sites - the Forbidden City, the Great Wall, the ancient Terra Cotta Warriors and bronze chariots of Xi’an, and the soaring postmodern skyscrapers of Shanghai. We witnessed the sunset from a pavilion in the northwest corner of the Forbidden City, overlooking dozens of fifteenth century buildings as if we ourselves were the dinner guests of some bygone Ming emperor. We were accorded an extraordinary level of respect and visibility; the visit of the Yale 100 was reported daily in the press, and, for the first two days, we were the top story on the evening news. Eighty-five members of our delegation had never before been to China, but after this magnificent introduction I imagine that most will return.
In a curious way, this trip, which provided such a rich education for faculty and students alike, reminded me of the experience that all of you have had during your time here in New Haven. Just as you were challenged by new ideas in the classroom, those encountering China for the first time were challenged by a relentless barrage of new ideas and new experiences. And, just as you found in your first weeks and months in New Haven, prejudices were shattered, and preconceptions replaced by observation and analysis. As one Yale student walked with my wife Jane along Chang’an Avenue, twelve lanes wide, after lunch with Chinese students at an elegant hotel adjacent to a shopping mall filled with boutiques representing the finest French, Italian, Japanese, and American designers - he remarked, “I thought that China was still a backward country, where everything would be primitive and disorganized, and that the Olympics next year would be a fiasco.” The next day, with the rest of us, he gaped in awe at our close-up view of the magnificent new Olympic stadium, perhaps the most beautiful sports arena constructed in modern times. Similarly, many of our faculty, expecting China’s universities to be miles behind Yale and its peers, were amazed by the state-of-the-art new laboratories at Tsinghua and Fudan Universities, and the Deputy Dean of our School of Management, who is in the midst of planning a new campus, said, upon seeing Tsinghua’s new business school, “Let’s just hire their architect and get started!”
As impressed as we were by China’s rapid development, the trip also gave us some proud and poignant moments, as we heard about Yale from the perspective of the Chinese. An undergraduate at Peking University, Zhang Xinyue, spoke to our group, describing her experience at Yale last summer in terms that I am sure resonate with your own. “The experience,” she said, “opened a door to a wider mind and a brighter future. … Yale is a place [that] encourages independent thinking and [the] courage to pursue dreams. … Yale students believe in a better world, and they are making efforts to achieve that.” She went on to conclude: “Yale is not only a name. It is a kind of spirit handed down from generation to generation. Yale not only provides knowledge, it gives you confidence, courage, and a caring heart. The Yalies care about life, their nation, and the whole world.” Zhang Xinyue’s emphasis on the importance of independent thinking was echoed by both her university’s president and the Vice Minister of Education, who recognize that encouraging the free inquiry that has been the essence of your experience here at Yale is the surest way to realize the full potential of China’s human resources.
 It was not only the new ideas and experiences we encountered that reminded me of your journey through Yale. Our students and faculty were also exhilarated by making new friends within the group, just as you were when you first met your Yale classmates. Our group, in its way, resembled your class. We were a diverse assembly - two or three students from each residential college, two from each professional school, a half dozen from the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, and about three dozen faculty and staff from all over the university. Very few people knew more than two or three others. Yet, just as you did in your first days at Yale, most discovered new friends with whom they shared a lot, as well as those whose perspectives and interests differed sharply from their own.
Remember how amazed you were to discover the astonishing talents of your otherwise unpretentious and friendly classmates? I was reminded of this when I happened to overhear a fragment of conversation between a student in the directing program at the Drama School and a professor in the School of Music. The student-director said, “I am considering doing a production next season about a musician, so I need an actor who can really play an instrument, preferably the cello.” And the music professor gave this astonishing reply: “There are two brilliant cellists on this trip, one of whom is standing next to you!” The cellist in question was a six-foot, three-inch young man who might easily have been mistaken for a varsity football player. China’s modernity was not the only stimulus that shattered our preconceptions on this trip! The wealth of talent and human potential throughout this university never ceases to astonish me, and I am sure that each of you will leave here with vivid memories of extraordinary people, many of whom will remain your lifelong friends.
As remarkable as the development of modern China is, all is not bliss. There are many paradoxes. What appeared to us as rampant capitalism is still officially described as “socialism with Chinese characteristics.” And even as students and university leaders advocate freedom of inquiry and independent thinking, one very successful Chinese businessman - a capitalist through and through - told us that he thought the Communist party had become too democratic, too prone to compromise in the face of public opinion, rather than simply “doing the right thing.” Chinese citizens remain subject to arbitrary arrest and detention, and, though the press is noticeably freer than it was a few years ago, the Internet is heavily censored. Still, there have been some major achievements in advancing the rule of law. Recently, private citizens have won court judgments against the state. And, as a powerful example of how we all might use our education to advance the public good, the Vice President of China’s Supreme Court, a graduate of the Yale Law School, told us how he, amazingly, introduced into the Chinese courtroom the practice of cross-examination!
Some of China’s problems are unique, but some are so inextricably bound up with those facing the United States that neither nation can succeed without the other. Protecting our environment is one such example. Global warming cannot be avoided unless both China and United States take dramatic action. Yale is doing its part, with its commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. But it will fall to your generation, acting as global citizens in concert with your counterparts in China and around the world, to show the way.
You might ask: why have I given you a travelogue as my final parting words? The answer is: to reassure you, and to encourage you. It is natural to feel sad right now about the Yale you are leaving behind, but I hope that my narrative suggests that there will be many more journeys in your lives.
Women and men of the Class of 2007: Everywhere you go, you will encounter new experiences and new people, some of whom will become fellow travelers on your journeys. If you leave here, as we know you will, with open minds and generosity of spirit, you will find every one of life’s journeys a new adventure - not unlike your four years at Yale College, but rather just like it. And on every journey, you will need to employ the powers of critical thinking you developed here to learn as much as you can, and the passion and empathy you displayed here to give to others more than you take. As you go forth from here, I urge you to use your natural gifts and the education you have been given to seek fulfillment in your own lives, and to seek the betterment of life for all with whom we share this small and shrinking planet.
 