It is a great honor to address the distinguished members of the Asia Society of Hong Kong once again.  Your entrepreneurial spirit and creative energy have helped to propel the astonishing rise of China, and I am by no means alone among American economists who admire and value your accomplishments. I am especially grateful to my good friend Ronnie Chan for offering me this opportunity to meet with you.

In April 2006, during his address at Yale University, President Hu Jintao invited 100 Yale faculty members and students to visit China as his guests “to enhance mutual understanding between young people and educators of the two countries.”  Last week, in response to President Hu’s generous display of friendship, I had the opportunity to lead a delegation of 62 Yale students and 38 faculty and staff to Beijing and Xi’an.  Most of our delegation had never been to China before; many had never been beyond the borders of the United States.  All of us were awed by the remarkable progress China is making, and truly inspired by your nation’s history, culture, and dynamism.

China’s economic growth is impressive, and in its magnitude historically unprecedented.  Since 1978 more people have been lifted out of poverty than over the entire course of the Industrial Revolution in Europe and North America between 1780 and 1850. To sustain rapid growth over the coming decades, however, China must confront some major challenges, and it is about this topic that I want to speak to you today.  In particular, I’d like to discuss three challenges to sustaining rapid economic growth: the need to develop a more robust rule of law, the need to encourage the independent and creative thinking that supports innovation, and the need to mitigate the adverse environmental impact of rapid growth.

Establishing a Rule of Law
China’s remarkable growth has been fueled, in substantial part, by opening the country to trade and foreign investment.  Outside investors everywhere are most attracted to environments that offer stable and predictable business relationships, enforceable contracts, and freedom from arbitrary and unforeseen intervention by government. China’s decision to enter the World Trade Organization signaled its awareness of these requirements by obligating itself to numerous conditions requiring reform of Chinese law.

China has made remarkable progress in the past decade toward establishing a rule of law.  The reform of administrative law, enacted by the National People’s Congress in 2004, has introduced increased regularity and new processes to the decision-making of government agencies.  Some administrative decisions now involve notices of rulemakings and the opportunity for public comment; many actions of government agencies are now subject to appeal and review by courts.  Limited rights of private ownership have been established by law, and for the first time, individuals have been empowered, and have, in a few cases, succeeded in defending their property rights against the state. 

These changes are impressive, but not yet comprehensive.  Despite steady progress in the spheres of commercial and administrative law, Chinese leaders are well aware that the judicial system is still incompletely developed, corruption is pervasive, and certain types of legal protection expected in modern commerce, such as enforceable intellectual property rights, are still for the most part absent. Freedom of expression remains unprotected, and arbitrary arrests and detention continue to inhibit China’s development in the political sphere.

As China continues to grow, the demands for a stable and predictable rule of law will come increasingly not from outside investors, but from its own rising class of businessmen and women.  As Chinese companies develop valuable trademarks and media products, enforceable intellectual property rights will no longer seem like an unreasonable imperative proffered by the U.S. government.  China’s leaders recognize that they will need to respond to the demands for an increasingly robust and pervasive rule of law, and take measures to reduce the corruption of government officials, or else the pace of investment and GDP growth will slacken.

At Yale, we have been honored by the Chinese government’s interest in collaborating with us on legal reform. The China Law Center at the Yale Law School, established in 1999 by former U.S. State Department official Professor Paul Gewirtz, is deeply engaged with China’s courts, law schools, administrative agencies, and the National People’s Congress - bringing prominent U.S. officials, scholars, and judges into contact with their Chinese counterparts and encouraging their collaboration on issues of reform.  Among the Center’s most significant contributions have been working with the People’s Supreme Court on the structure of the Chinese judicial system and working with the National People’s Congress on the reform of administrative law. 

Later this month the China Law Center, in collaboration with the China National School of Administration, will sponsor the third annual session of the China-Yale Senior Government Leadership Program, an intensive training program on how the “rule of law” functions in the United States.  This program regularly attracts to Yale the most senior group of Chinese government officials to participate in executive education outside of China.  Participants in the program have included Yale scholars from a variety of fields, two U.S. Supreme Court justices, current and former U.S. cabinet secretaries, the Governor of New York, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, and, last year, the President of the United States.  At Yale, we consider our involvement with China’s efforts to widen the rule of law to be one of our most significant global undertakings.

Innovation & Creativity
Twenty years ago, many commentators in the United States were extolling the virtues of Japanese management practices, worrying about Japan’s large trade surpluses, and predicting that Japan would soon overtake the United States as the world’s leading economic power.  In the first four decades after the Second World War, Japan’s productivity and GDP rose more rapidly than that of the United States; yet after 1990, Japan stagnated for fifteen years, only recently resuming a reasonable pace of economic growth.

What happened? The conventional story is that excessive corporate debt and a rigid financial system, hampered by an unwise deflationary monetary policy put the brakes on Japanese growth.  This is a partial truth; but if we end the explanation there we would fail to recognize a more profound underlying cause of Japan’s slowdown. In the 1950s and 1960s Japan’s growth was propelled by the same fuel that drives China today, a high savings rate and a large pool of underemployed labor, which allows manufacturing to boom without driving up wages.  By the 1970s, Japan had absorbed its surplus labor, and a new growth dynamic took over: attention to quality and efficiency in manufacturing.  But Japan’s edge did not survive the IT revolution of the 1990s.  Innovation in software and communications technology gave the United States a decisive productivity advantage.  Japan could not innovate fast enough, and it fell into a 15-year slump.

If you are not convinced by this argument, try the following mental experiment: imagine that Microsoft, Netscape, Apple, and Google were Japanese companies.  Would Japanese growth in the 1990s have lagged so far behind the United States?  I think not.

The brilliance of China’s leadership is that it has farsightedly recognized the reasons for Japan’s failure to innovate, and it is already taking steps to prepare China for a future, perhaps two decades away, in which it can no longer compete globally and win on the basis of low labor costs.  Understanding that China must learn to innovate, President Hu Jintao has made innovation and creativity the centerpiece of his current five-year plan.

Avoiding the fate of Japan won’t be without its challenges.  The secret lies in acknowledging the three principal factors that have contributed to America’s decisive advantage in innovation, and then doing something about each of them.  The first requisite is for China to achieve world-class stature in basic scientific research, not just in applied engineering, because basic science is the ultimate source from which all applied technology flows.  The second requisite is that China’s educational system must encourage its graduates to think creatively and independently, and the third is for China to develop a financial system with the flexibility to support high-risk start up enterprises, which generate a disproportionate share of transformational innovations.  In this third area, China is already taking measures that Japan long resisted, by gradually opening its major financial institutions to foreign partnerships and encouraging the rise of a new venture-capital sector.  Let me dwell a bit longer on China’s approach to the first and second requirements for innovation.

China is investing heavily in science and higher education.  Total central government expenditure on universities grew by a factor of seven between 1995 and 2002.  To cite a couple of striking examples, Shanghai Jiao Tong University has built more than 275,000 square meters of state-of-the-art science and engineering labs on its sprawling new campus, while IBM, Intel, and Microsoft built major facilities in the adjacent industrial park.  And Peking University’s Institute of Microelectronics has built two state-of-the-art semiconductor fabrication lines, each employing a different advanced technology.  No U.S. university has a comparable facility.

China’s leading universities are also making a conscious effort to attract back the best of those who have gone abroad for Ph.D.study.  For established faculty from the West, several top schools are now offering salaries and housing allowances designed to match the standard of living on U.S. campuses.  Peking and Fudan Universities have established large laboratories for leading U.S. scientists of Chinese origin, in both cases Yale geneticists.  This type of investment creates tremendous spillovers for China as it permits younger faculty and graduate students to work in close proximity with some of the best scientists in the world.

Even more interesting than China’s investment in science is its recognition that its pedagogy needs to change.  Some senior national leaders have come to believe that the traditional Chinese deference to the authority of the professor discourages independent thinking and thus potentially limits China’s development as an innovator.  These leaders note that the top colleges and universities of the West encourage their students to speak up in class, challenge their professors, question conventional wisdom, develop problem-solving skills, and think independently. This pedagogical approach is believed to be more conducive than passive learning to producing the kind of flexible, adapative, and creative engineers and business leaders who drive innovation.

Elite universities in China are also looking with interest at abandoning the specialized undergraduate curriculum imported from Europe and the Soviet Union in favor of the American-style liberal arts curriculum, in which students study a variety of subjects to gain breadth and flexibility, before specializing in a major field of study.  Some of the top universities are also experimenting with criteria other than scores on national examinations to admit students, in order to favor candidates with high potential for creativity and contribution to society.

Yale has been pleased and privileged to play a central role in all these educational reforms that I just outlined.  In collaboration with the Ministry of Education, we have worked with the presidents, party secretaries, and vice presidents of China’s top universities for each of the past three summers, sharing with them best U.S. practices in the areas of strategic planning, recruiting faculty, supporting world-class research, curricuum, and pedagogy.  Over the years the focus has gradually migrated from a study of U.S. practices to a dialogue on the very impressive progress of reform in China.  We look forward to continuing involvement in this very exciting evolution.

Reducing the Environmental Impact of Economic Growth
China’s economic growth labors under a handicap that did not burden those nations that developed earlier.  Western Europe, North America, Russia, Japan, and South Korea all achieved industrialization at a time when the environmental impact of growth was below the radar screen.  The impacts were severe, to be sure, but global awareness of these impacts was limited until, roughly, forty years ago.  China, unlike its more developed neighbors, must make its transition from an agricultural to an industrial and eventually to a knowledge economy in an atmosphere of worldwide pressure to mitigate the adverse environmental consequences of growth.  And it must do so with full knowledge of the adverse public health consequences of air pollution and contaminated water supply for its own citizens – consequences of which earlier industrializing nations were unaware, or could ignore.

The burden is huge.  China will soon surpass the United States as the largest producer of the greenhouse gas emissions that are causing harmful climate change.  To accommodate rapid growth, China is building coal-fired power plants at the rate of one per week, and it is expected to account for one-third of the worldwide growth in energy demand between now and 2020.  As many as 500 million people will migrate from countryside to city by mid-century, and hundreds of new satellite cities will be built.  It matters enormously for the future of the planet whether these cities are sprawling, automobile-dependent and energy inefficient, or alternatively, “smart” cities - dense and reliant on public transport.

It would be entirely unfair to place the full burden of mitigating environmental impacts on China and other emerging economies.  The West must do its part.  I agree entirely with the view of Professor Lu Zhi of Peking University, who, during a recent visit to Yale, stated that China’s environmental dilemma is the world’s dilemma, and that if we want China to change, we all have to change. The United States and the rest of the developed world cannot ask China and other developing countries to halt their economic and social progress because we have already filled the atmosphere with greenhouse gases and because we do not want competition for the natural resources on which we all depend.

We need to work together. Global warming cannot be averted unless both China and the United States make substantial reduction in their emissions of greenhouse gases.  While Europe has taken this challenge seriously, the United States still lags, paralyzed by powerful interest groups supporting continued dependence on carbon-based fuels and by a public that resists the imposition of high taxes on gasoline that is a reality elsewhere in the world.  We need courage and leadership to confront this issue back at home, but we must.  The last twelve months have offered the first signs of hope that a bipartisan coalition may be developing to take global warming seriously.

China has certain advantages in pursuing environmental remediation.  It will be planning large cities from scratch, opening a wide range of possibilities for innovations that would be much harder to retrofit in established cities.  And, because it will soon be the world’s largest producer and consumer of coal, it has a powerful incentive to develop new technologies for the conversion of coal and the sequestration of the carbon by-products of its combustion.  China could easily become the worldwide leader in these technologies, which will have a huge market worldwide.

International collaboration will be essential in confronting the environmental challenge, and here, too, Yale is proud to be doing its part to work with China, along with a number of leading U.S. NGOs including the Energy Foundation and the Natural Resources Defense Council.  For the past three years, in partnership with Tsinghua University, our School of Forestry and Environmental Studies has been training Chinese mayors and vice-mayors responsible for urban planning and development.  And, along with Tsinghua, Shanghai Jiaotong, and China’s Center for Environmentally Sustainable Technology Transfer, we have developed executive training courses in industrial ecology, promoting a comprehensive approach to recognizing, measuring, and managing the environmental impacts of an enterprise’s total activity.

Conclusion
Thank you for permitting me this opportunity to address you today. The challenges confronting China’s efforts to sustain economic growth are substantial, but they are surmountable.  We need only hope for more of the farsighted leadership that China has displayed since 1978, for continued openness to international collaboration, and for recognition elsewhere that China’s continued rise benefits the whole world.
