As we mark the national holiday for the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. on Monday, we are reminded of his visit to Yale in June 1964 to receive an Honorary Degree. Dr. King’s citation noted that his “eloquence has kindled the nation’s sense of outrage” at the racial discrimination that remained tragically embedded in so many parts of America.

We take stock of the progress made in the last four decades - progress made possible by his work before his tragic assassination 40 years ago and by the inspiration of his living legacy ever since. We remind ourselves of the conditions of violence and struggle that marked the civil rights era of the 1960s, and at the same time we are mindful of the stubborn reality that our nation has not yet achieved the dream to which Dr. King gave so much inspiration, as well as his own life.

We should, of course, celebrate progress. But we should also rededicate ourselves to the still unfinished work that Dr. King called upon all of humanity to pursue - to overcome “the long night of racial injustice” and establish a reign of freedom and a rule of justice for all people.

Although we at Yale and elsewhere observe the King holiday as a day without classes or normal staff duties, I encourage all of us to take this not as a mere “day off” but to make it a special day to renew our personal and collective commitment to racial, social, and economic justice and to reflect on how our collective diversity contributes to the strength of our institution and the richness of our individual lives. We should resolve to deepen our efforts to promote inclusion and to build on our campus a community where diversity of all types is celebrated and recognized as a precious asset. I hope you will take advantage of the numerous commemorative events on campus this weekend and Monday; for information see the press release “Yale University Honors the Legacy of Martin Luther King, Jr.”

This past fall, we were reminded that our work to bring unity and justice is not finished as the campus saw two acts of disturbing racist and homophobic graffiti. I was gratified by the widespread concern expressed by students, faculty, staff, and alumni in response to these incidents. Our community will best rid itself of hateful attitudes by speaking out against them.

Dr. King had a dream that one day all children would live in a nation where they were judged not by the color of their skin but by the content of their character, and this dream has particular importance for our academic community. We can all be proud that Yale was home to Edward Bouchet, the first African-American to earn a Ph.D. in 1876, but we must remember that for most of the institution’s history, Yale was not a diverse place and Bouchet’s personal achievement was an extraordinary one.

In the 1960s, moved by Dr. King and others, Yale among many academic institutions recognized the need to overcome a history of discrimination and began in earnest to identify and encourage African-American and other minority group applicants. The diversity of our matriculants has increased markedly over the decades, and we now have a deeply-rooted and broad commitment to maintaining that diversity. This year’s freshman class is the most diverse in Yale’s 306-year history. Yale College students come from many races and ethnic groups, represent numerous religious faiths and hail from all 50 states and 42 nations. From these diverse backgrounds come varied points of view, and each student’s education is enriched by respectful encounters with those who have had different experiences and who hold different beliefs.

Our commitment to diversity has been a priority for the faculty. As Yale’s tercentennial neared, then Provost Richard and I renewed our dedication to Dr. King’s dream by expanding our efforts to achieve greater diversity among the faculty. Provost Hamilton and I reaffirmed that commitment two years ago. Through collaboration with individual departments, the representation of women faculty and faculty of color has since increased. Under the leadership of the newly appointed Deputy Provost for Faculty Development, Judith Chevalier, we are further increasing our focus on inclusion of faculty members of all races. We will persist in these efforts among the faculties in the Arts and Sciences and in the professional schools.

Most recently, I have made recruitment of more men and women of color to the administrative ranks an important priority. As is the case with the student body, we strive to make the presence of exceptional staff from diverse backgrounds the rule rather than the exception in management. All of the Officers of the University are committed to building on the current foundation and to working with the Deans and Directors to recruit and hire outstanding women and people of color for senior management positions throughout the University. Nydia Gonzalez, Yale’s first Chief Diversity Officer, was appointed last year, and she has been developing plans to realize this objective.

Our actions to strengthen inclusion and diversity on campus complement our work with our neighbors throughout New Haven to make our hometown a better place to live and work for all its citizens. In this area, too, we have made great progress and have helped give life to the dreams that Dr. King left for us. As recently as 1985, a journalist writing about campus and community relations noted that Yale was “impervious” to the Dixwell neighborhood, a historic heart of the African-American community.

Today, we and our neighbors are removing those barriers and have forged a lasting partnership. This new era is reflected in our Dixwell-Yale University Community Learning Center, a Yale facility at the new University Police headquarters featuring large glass walls that welcome hundreds of children and adults every week for learning and recreation programs. The center is part of our comprehensive community investment program that was described by the New York Times in December in an article titled “Yale and New Haven Find Common Ground.” Roxanne Condon, chair of the neighborhood management team in Dixwell, was quoted in the Times saying, “Now everybody is realizing that we are in this together, that if the community improves, that improves Yale because Yale benefits from the improvement of the community. It’s a whole new mind-set.” This perspective is one that we all share, as good neighborliness has become our rule and routine.

At this time of reflection and rededication for the King Holiday, I am heartened by the progress our society and our university have made. We owe thanks to Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., since more than almost any other American, he gave the enduring inspiration for opening wide the doors of opportunity and possibility for all people. As we reflect now, 44 years since Dr. King came to Yale and became an honorary alumnus, let us take inspiration from his living legacy, let us appreciate the progress that has been made because of his service and sacrifice and, most importantly, let us rededicate ourselves to persist in the work that remains to make the American dream a reality for all.
