 Remarks on the Award of The Queen’s Anniversary Prizes for Higher and Further Education
Your Royal Highness, my Lords, Ladies and Gentlemen:
I am greatly honored to be with you tonight, as we celebrate 21 institutions for their excellence in higher and further education. This splendid setting appropriately dignifies the extraordinary work that they have done, and, as a representative of one of Britain’s oldest colonial universities, I am grateful for the opportunity to salute my worthy colleagues.
Seeking inspiration for this magnificent occasion, I turned to a captivating book published last year, entitled The Boy Who Harnessed the Wind. It tells the story of William Kamkwamba, a young boy from a tiny village in Malawi. From an early age he took apart radios and tried to figure out what made them work. Later, at age 14, after a devastating famine left his family too poor to pay school fees, he studied alone in a small public library that was stocked with books donated by the government of the United States. There he devoured an elementary textbook called Explaining Physics that helped him to understand conceptually what he had discovered inductively by tinkering with radios. Then, providentially, he stumbled upon a book called Using Energy, which illustrated how a windmill could be used to generate electricity. Scavenging parts from a junkyard, persuading friends and relatives to part with bicycle frames and copper wire, William built a windmill, so that he could read after dark. Later he built another windmill to power a water pump that ensured his family against another famine.
William Kamkwamba’s moving and inspirational story is a perfect tale for our age, and for this occasion. It shows us how education, science and technology can improve the material conditions of life and uplift the human spirit. Through study, imagination, resourcefulness, and stubborn persistence William harnessed the wind, and in so doing created a better life for himself, his family and his village. The institutions we honor tonight have in similar fashion harnessed the wind. They have drawn upon and advanced human knowledge of nature and culture, and reached out to the world around them, using that knowledge to improve the material and spiritual conditions of citizens both near and far.
Two of the many lessons taught by William Kamkwamba’s story seem worthy of note this evening.
First is the importance of access to education. During and after the Malawi famine of 2002, William’s family could not afford to pay the tuition to send him to secondary school. It took unusual determination and dedication on William’s part to overcome this handicap by studying independently in the village library. By contrast, in the United Kingdom, thanks to massive government investment, access to free secondary education is ubiquitous, and access to tertiary education has increased dramatically. Of the relevant age cohort, nearly 60 percent pursue higher and further education, compared to only 15 percent four decades ago. Like the United States, the United Kingdom is fortunate to have a rich diversity of institutions that serve the wide range of society’s needs for higher and further education – from the education in the liberal arts that inspires future scholars, government officials, and business leaders to the training that imparts essential skills to nurses, technicians, and office workers. The full spectrum of institutions that participate in strengthening the nation are represented and recognized here tonight. We celebrate the contribution of them all.
The second lesson of William’s story is that knowledge can have powerful practical consequences. We see this illustrated abundantly in the work of the institutions we honor tonight. From the management of chronic pain to increasing crop yields to combatting climate change, the research and educational programs of the 21 institutions represented here are having an important influence on the world outside the academy. Indeed, each of the citations published on the web site of the Royal Anniversary Trust refers to the public impact of the work being recognized. Even the outstanding archaeology done at the University of Reading is cited for the help it provides to law enforcement agencies, and the impressive array of African, Asian, and Middle Eastern languages offered by the School of Oriental and African Studies is cited for its contribution to social cohesion across the country.
It is laudable that the work of colleges and universities advances the nation’s social and economic agenda. But, if I may be so bold, is there not a danger that too much weight is being accorded to immediate social benefit? The purposes of institutions of higher and further education go beyond immediate practical impact. Whether students study cooking at Thames Valley University or read “Greats” at Oxford, it is immensely valuable to awaken in them passions that will enliven and motivate them, and to develop in them a capacity to continue to learn throughout their lifetimes. Such outcomes will, of course, have societal consequences in some ultimate sense, because the success of our democracies depends upon having citizens with a capacity to learn and adapt. But learning cannot and should not be justified entirely on grounds of social impact. Learning enriches the human experience, and as educators we should not lose sight of this.
This danger is manifest also in the current discussion of the proposed new criteria for assessing government-sponsored research. The new Research Excellence Framework puts 25 percent weight on the impact of research on the economy, society, culture, public policy, or quality of life. The higher education funding councils recognize the difficulty of identifying such effects, and they are running a pilot exercise this coming summer to test the new approach. They propose, for example, that every unit seeking funding should conduct case studies of the consequences of their past research. Recognizing that the effects of research are rarely immediate, the funding councils suggest that units look back ten to fifteen years to identify the sources of impacts that can be observed today.
Such an approach to assessment may well miss more than it harvests. Most fundamental advances in science do not yield practical results in ten to fifteen years. The time lag is usually much longer, and consequences are rarely foreseen at the time of discovery. For example, when the first laser was built in 1960, no one imagined that it would be adapted for use in eye surgery 27 years later. The first quantum computer was built at Yale last year. It holds the promise of orders of magnitude increases in computing speed and power. We can only begin to imagine the applications that a full-scale, commercially viable quantum computer will make possible, but we can safely predict that it will be at least 20 years before one is built and sold.
My point is simple: putting too much weight on the immediate, even the intermediate-term practical impact of research will distort the progress of science, technology, and humanistic research in this country. The UK has one percent of the world’s population, 12 percent of its scholarly citations and 40 percent of its top five universities. Underweighting the importance of fundamental science and curiosity-driven research across the spectrum of human knowledge may jeopardize this enviable position.
William Kamkwamba’s achievement had a powerful impact on his tiny African village. And there is no doubt that at a certain point he became aware of the potential practical consequences of the knowledge he had acquired. But his initial interest in electricity was not spurred by a practical objective. He simply wanted to understand how his radio worked. And his interest in the physics books he found was not motivated by a desire to provide electric power for his family and his village; he was motivated by intellectual curiosity pure and simple. In seeking practical outcomes from our institutions of higher and further education, whose work has so much value, let us not neglect the spark – the desire to understand – that makes all else possible.
 