 It is a pleasure to be with you today, and an honor to address friends and members of an association that advances the cause of higher education so effectively.  Thank you for the opportunity.
Three years after the onset of the Great Recession, even as the economy recovers, we remain in a state of deep national anxiety.  Nearly 16 per cent of the workforce remains unemployed, underemployed, or discouraged from seeking employment.1 Families across the country are worried about their financial security and the prospects for their children.  State governments, along with the federal government, which faced structural deficits even before the recession, must now deal with the painful necessity of reducing spending and increasing taxes despite the unpopularity of both sets of measures.
With every category of discretionary public expenditure under serious scrutiny, it is incumbent upon us to make the case for higher education with renewed vigor.  To us, the case seems obvious; we take for granted that there is no more important investment in the future of our nation.  But elected officials, and many of our fellow citizens, do not share our experience and do not necessarily share our conclusions.  We need to persuade them why colleges and universities matter.  And so my task this afternoon is to articulate in a language that people can understand, the case for public support of higher education. 
As committed educators, we know that the most profound consequence of education is one that we cannot sell easily to state or federal legislators or other elected officials.  From our experience in the classroom, from the light in our students’ eyes as they first comprehend a difficult idea, we know that education improves the soul.  It empowers young people with the capacity to enrich their lives spiritually and materially, to educate their own children, and to become better citizens.
Our elected representatives who control the resources that support our institutions demand more concrete answers.  So let’s give them three claims that they can more easily advance and defend.
First, the basic research done in our universities has been for six decades and still remains the principal driver of U.S. economic growth and advances in human health.
Second, our diverse array of educational institutions - private and public, two-year and four-year, selective and less selective - educates a broad and diverse workforce suited to an immense variety of occupations and roles and gives the U.S. economy unparalleled flexibility in adapting to changes in technology and market conditions.
Third, our colleges and universities are the nation’s principal avenue of upward social mobility, delivering more than any other institutions on the promise of making America a land of opportunity.
Let me elaborate in turn the argument for each of these claims.
Universities as Engines of Innovation
Among fully developed economies, global competitive advantage derives primarily from a nation’s capacity to innovate: to introduce and develop new products, processes, and services.  This has been the foundation of America’s economic leadership in the period following the Second World War.  And it will continue to be a basis for American economic strength in the highly globalized economy of the 21st Century.
Innovation in the economy requires perceived opportunities in the marketplace, but it rests on the underpinning of advances in basic research.  Curiosity-driven research - motivated by the quest for knowledge and without a clear, practical objective - is the source from which all commercially oriented applied research and development ultimately flows.  I say ultimately because it often takes decades before the commercial implications of an important scientific discovery are fully realized.  When the argon-ion gas laser was invented at Yale in the 1960s, its inventor, William Bennett, had not the remotest idea that the laser he invented would be used thirty-five years later to perform surgery on his detached retina.  The commercial potential of a particular discovery is often unanticipated, and often extends to many unrelated industries and applications, as was the case with the laser. 
The contributions of university research are embedded in our daily lives.  The Prius that I drove to the airport this morning uses lithium-ion batteries that were conceived in the 1970s by Stanley Whittingham, then a post-doctoral fellow at Stanford, and developed throughout his research career at Exxon and Binghamton University.  Whittingham’s idea was further refined by John Goodenough at the University of Texas, Austin, who made important advances in cathode design.  Additional discoveries by Goodenough and Yet-Ming Chiang at MIT improved the performance of the lithium-ion battery, and made it a viable candidate to power electric vehicles.
University research also played a significant role in the discovery of the antiretroviral drugs that have made HIV a chronic, instead of a fatal, disease.  William Prusoff and Tai-shun Lin of Yale demonstrated Zerit’s effectiveness against HIV in 1994.  A group of faculty at Emory - Dennis Liotta, Raymond Schinazi, and Woo-Baeg Choi - identified the drug that became Emtriva.  Abacavir was invented at the University of Minnesota.  Epivir was invented at McGill University in collaboration with IAF Biochem; subsequent research was conducted at Emory before the drug was brought to the market, and faculty at Yale first showed its effectiveness against Hepatitis B.  The active involvement and collaboration of universities in HIV drug development was no accident; it built upon years of basic research into retroviruses at these same institutions.
In 2007 two researchers based at European universities won the Nobel Prize for their 1988 discovery of giant magnetoresistance.  This advance in basic research led to a new technology called spintronics (spin-transport electronics) that has found its first application in computer hard drives.  Spintronics led to a disk reader that is orders of magnitude more sensitive than previous designs, opening the way to disk drives that store information much more densely, and thus more cheaply.  This has accelerated exponential growth in storage capacity, enabling an entirely new frontier - computing in the “cloud.”
There are many more examples like these.  The first working quantum computer was built at Yale two years ago.  It holds the promise of orders of magnitude increases in computing speed and power, although it is likely to be at least twenty years before a full-scale, commercially viable quantum computer is built.  Another example: the 2010 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to two scientists at the University of Manchester for discovering the properties of graphene, a super-strong material comprised of a single layer of carbon atoms, which may in due course become the medium that replaces silicon as a semiconductor. 
Our elected officials need to know that the scientific discoveries that will shape the future of our economy still emanate from our research universities.  And, as two of the last three examples illustrate, this country has no monopoly on these discoveries.  We need to generate our share of them, and that will require sustained funding.
As a corollary to the arguments for supporting basic research, we should also point out that, thanks to the incentives created by the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980, our universities are now more actively involved in stimulating commercial innovation than ever before.  The National Science Board reports that articles written by faculty account for 64 percent of the papers cited in patent applications in 2008, up from 58 percent in 1998.2  
In advancing the argument that university research is a fundamental driver of commercial innovation, we need to remember that Congress did not give us property rights over inventions funded by Federal agencies for the purpose of enhancing our revenues.  The purpose of the Bayh-Dole Act was to ensure that there was adequate incentive to commercialize the fruits of publicly funded research, so that socially valuable ideas would not lie fallow.  This lesson of history is too often forgotten as universities pursue legislation and lawsuits designed to strengthen their intellectual property rights.  Congress did not intend to confer upon us the right to maximize profits; it gave us private property rights for a public purpose - to ensure that the benefits or our research are widely shared.  To emphasize this point, a small group of universities and organizations - Boston University, Brown, Harvard, Penn, and Yale - adopted in 2009 a Statement on Global Access to Medicines, which committed them to ensuring that developing countries would have low cost access to drugs based on patents we license to pharmaceutical companies.  A total of 25 organizations have endorsed this statement.
Colleges and Universities as Educators of a Diverse and Flexible Work Force
I have thus far illustrated some of the arguments we might make to increase public support for research.  We also need to make the case for our educational mission.  I would suggest that we emphasize two particular themes: first, even though we see the need for improvement in this dimension, our institutions do the important work of meeting the workforce needs of a rapidly changing economy, and, second, access to colleges and universities is today the principal means of upward social mobility.
We live in a world of rapid change.  New scientific discoveries are made every day, and new theories displace old ones.  Many successful companies produce products or services based on technology or marketing strategies that did not exist a decade or two ago.  New challenges arise, such as global warning, that call for leaders, as well as citizens, to make informed judgments about scientific evidence, risk, and tradeoffs between various social goods.  Government officials confront a world radically altered by changes in communications technology; consider, for example, the events now taking place in North Africa and the Middle East.  In such a world, knowledge of a given body of information is not enough to survive, much less thrive; scientists, business leaders, and government officials alike must have the ability to think critically and creatively, and to draw upon and adapt ideas to new environments.
Many of America’s colleges and universities practice a method of education that is especially conducive to preparing graduates for such a dynamic world.  What we call liberal education has two distinctive features that are not yet widespread around the world.  First, most of our undergraduates are exposed to a wide variety of disciplines and hence develop the capacity to see the world from multiple perspectives.  Second, the pedagogy of liberal education, at its best, encourages students not to reproduce what they learn in lectures and textbooks, but to think for themselves.  This pedagogy is practiced rigorously at our leading institutions, where reliance on rote memorization is minimal and where writing assignments and examinations typically ask students to analyze complicated questions that have no single right answer.  Little wonder that policy makers throughout Asia are currently focused on exposing their future leaders to the breadth and pedagogy of liberal education even as we worry about the rate at which Asian countries are training specialized engineers.
One of the great virtues of American higher education is its diversity.  Some of our institutions offer broad, liberal education of the type I have been describing, and thus serve well those who go on to become scholars, teachers, scientists, professionals, managers, civil servants, and leaders in every sphere.  But the dynamic economy also requires a workforce with the skills for an immense variety of roles.  Hence, many of our four-year institutions and nearly all of our two-year institutions offer a rich set of vocationally oriented options to students.  Next year, just two city blocks from the edge of the Yale campus in downtown New Haven, Gateway Community College will open a brand-new campus.  Gateway’s curriculum could hardly be more different from Yale’s, and yet it plays an extraordinarily valuable role in preparing the Connecticut workforce.  It offers associate’s degrees in automotive technology, computer networking, exercise science, hotel-motel management, retail management, and a wide array of health care support vocations.  Like many of our two-year colleges, Gateway’s curriculum responds rapidly to changes in the local economy and to the needs of employers.  About fifteen years ago, when Yale began to take an active interest in locating spinoff biotechnology companies around our campus, Gateway responded immediately by creating an associate’s degree program in biomedical engineering.  The flexibility and responsiveness of our community colleges is a tremendous asset for the nation.
Colleges and Universities as Avenues of Upward Social Mobility
I have to this point elaborated upon two reasons why colleges and universities matter: through their research they are engines of innovation and economic growth, and they educate a diverse and flexible workforce for a dynamic economy.  Let me turn now to the third reason, well known to you, but inadequately appreciated by our elected officials and fellow citizens: in the United States today, there is no more effective instrument of self-improvement than our colleges and universities.
The evidence is powerful.  It is clear that lifetime earnings rise with each year of schooling beyond high school, and this premium has grown over time.  In 1973 the median earnings of a student graduating from a four-year college were 40 percent higher than a high school graduate; by 2008 the earnings premium from four years of college had increased to 66 percent.3  Similarly, the median earnings for recipients of Master’s degrees were 97 percent higher than those of high school graduates, and median earnings for professional degrees were 174 percent higher.  College graduates are also much less likely to be unemployed. Throughout the current recession the unemployment rate of college graduates aged 25 and older has remained at or below 5 percent.  It is currently 4.3%, compared to an unemployment rate of 9.5 for high school graduates.4
These figures reflect fundamental shifts in the economy.  Unlike previous industrial revolutions, such as the assembly line, which devalued individual skill, the onset of the information age has put a premium on skills.  In addition, the globalization of commerce has put pressure on wages paid for manufacturing jobs that do not require a college education.  Consequently, over the past three decades the inflation-adjusted median income of households with a bachelor’s degree or more rose steadily while the inflation-adjusted median income of households with no more than a high school education has remained more or less flat since 1980.5
In addition to increasing expected incomes, higher education promotes upward mobility, and thus enables the realization of the deeply rooted American belief that individuals can improve their circumstances.
Ron Haskins of the Brookings Institution has offered compelling evidence that college creates the opportunity to break out of poverty.  Of the adults who were born into families in the lowest 20 percent of the income distribution, those who do not attend college have only a 14 percent chance of making it to the top 40 percent of the income distribution.  Those who complete college, however, have a 42 percent chance of reaching the top 40 percent of the income distribution.6
Equally convincing evidence comes from the record of highly selective colleges and universities, all of which offer very generous need-based financial aid.  When asked, ten years after graduation, only 5% of Yale alumni report that at the time they attended college, their families had much higher incomes than the average of their class.  If we exclude that group, the remaining 95% of alumni divide roughly evenly among those whose family incomes were higher than average, average, and below average. And yet ten years after graduation the average incomes earned by alumni in each of these three groups was almost exactly the same!  In other words, except for the very wealthiest, all graduates of Yale faced identical earning opportunities after graduation.   
Conclusion
I hope you will forgive me, an economist, for emphasizing the economic reasons why colleges and universities matter.  We are all well aware that these are not the only reasons.  I mentioned earlier that education is good for the soul.  It is also true that college graduates are healthier; they smoke less, weigh less, and exercise more than their contemporaries who did not complete college.  They are more likely to take their children to a library, and to read to their preschool children on a daily basis.  They are more likely to undertake voluntary service, and, when they volunteer, to spend more time at it.  They are also more likely to vote.7
These are all important reasons why our governments, state and federal, should support the enterprise of higher education.  But at a time of economic duress, it seems to me that the economic arguments are the most salient.  Our colleges and universities – through the research we do, the flexible workforce we educate, and the social mobility we provide - contribute powerfully to the economic wellbeing of the nation.  We need to make these arguments understood by state and federal legislators, by governors and the White House, and by the public.  Unless we do, we will have little chance of maintaining and increasing federal support for research, Pell Grants, and student loans, and little chance of reversing the deeply distressing trend toward reduced state government support for our extraordinary public colleges and universities.  We all know that our arguments are compelling, and that they have never been more important.  Let’s get out there and make the case.
 
