 Secretary Donley, General Rice, Mr. Ginsberg, General Kodlick, Colonel Estock, Lt. Colonel Weibel, fellow members of the faculty, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen:
It is a delight to welcome you to Yale for the signing of an agreement to establish an Air Force ROTC detachment at Yale in the fall of 2012. I also extend a special welcome to the cadets from Detachment 115 from the University of Connecticut, which has hosted Yale students for many years. I am delighted that Robbie Berschinski has made the trip from Washington to join us today. Robbie is a graduate of Yale and Detachment 115, and he honored us all by being named the Air Force Cadet of the Year in 2002.
I also wish to recognize Linda Schwartz, the Commissioner of Veterans Affairs for Connecticut. Commissioner Schwartz was an Air Force nurse for nearly 20 years, and retired after sustaining serious injuries in an aircraft accident. She holds degrees from Yale in Nursing and Public Health, and has long been a good friend and advocate for both veterans and Yale.
I thank all of you for joining us in this important moment for Yale, the Air Force, and the country.
Just over two weeks ago I welcomed the class of 2015. I exhorted them to take full advantage of the many resources of Yale; I also made the claim that a singular advantage of a Yale education is its cultivation of habits of critical thinking and the ability to see the big picture. I suggested to the freshmen and their parents that these qualities will prove to be instrumental in devising creative, far-reaching solutions to the challenges they encounter in whatever career they choose.
Those same qualities are equally important for the leadership of the country’s armed forces. As a partnership uniting the Armed Services and the nation’s universities, ROTC enables the military to identify officer candidates who bring a breadth of perspectives to national service. My colleagues and I are honored to host the Air Force ROTC and to play a larger role in training the future leaders of the Air Force.
Bringing Air Force ROTC to Yale is a natural evolution of Yale’s long and deep tradition of public service. That tradition finds expression in the service our graduates render to their communities across the nation, in their disproportionate contribution as elected and appointed government officials, and in their military service. A short distance away from us, in the rotunda of Woolsey Hall, we document and honor the sacrifices of Yale graduates in the nation’s wars.
I look forward to this new chapter in Yale’s partnership with the Air Force. For those Yale students interested in serving their country, ROTC will now be a more attractive option. Similarly, as other colleges and universities become affiliated with the Yale Detachment, ROTC will become a more practical choice for students throughout western and southern Connecticut.
I offer profound thanks to Secretary Donley, General Rice, General Peck, Colonel Dunn, and their colleagues for their creativity in establishing this ROTC detachment at Yale. Opening and sustaining an ROTC unit requires a substantial commitment of funds and manpower, and the number of cadets completing ROTC nationally already exceeds the number of Officers who are commissioned each year. I commend Secretary Donley, General Rice and General Peck for seeing the big picture, and for seeing the importance, even in difficult financial times, of making it easier for future officers to get the benefit of a Yale education.
Last evening Yale students, faculty, and staff held a very moving candlelight vigil to honor the victims of September 11th and to acknowledge how fortunate we are to be in America, where we have the freedom to create and sustain an institution like this one - devoted to the principles cherished by our nation’s founders: free inquiry, open-mindedness, and toleration. Today, by establishing an Air Force ROTC unit, we strengthen Yale’s capacity to contribute to the defense of those principles that we still cherish more than two centuries later. We thank Secretary Donley and his colleagues for giving us the opportunity to deepen our commitment to this great nation, which remains a beacon of liberty and justice in a world of great uncertainty.
Thank you for joining us today. It is now my pleasure to introduce Michael P. Donley, Secretary of the Air Force.
 