 Secretary Mabus, Assistant Secretary Garcia, Captain Harrell, fellow members of the faculty, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen:
It is a delight to welcome you to Yale on this historic occasion of the signing of an agreement to bring Naval ROTC back to Yale in the fall of 2012. I also extend a special welcome to the midshipmen from the Naval ROTC unit based at the College of the Holy Cross, as well as the recently commissioned officers who have just completed their training. This is an important moment for Yale, the Navy, and the country. I have looked forward to this event for many years.
Yale is one of the great universities of the world, and our faculty, students and staff strive to serve the country through our educational programs and our research. As all of my colleagues from Yale know, we have for more than three centuries cultivated a deep and thriving tradition of public service — locally, nationally, and globally. There is an equally strong tradition at Yale of educating leaders who leave a lasting imprint on whatever field of endeavor they choose as a career.
These two traditions — public service and leadership — have been expressed in the contributions that Yale students and graduates have made to the military for many generations. The rotunda at Woolsey Hall, at the very heart of our campus, is inscribed with the names of Yale graduates who gave their lives in America’s wars. Yale’s tradition of service in defense of the nation reaches back to our earliest days, when in 1779 Yale President Ezra Stiles led more than half of the student body to contest a landing in New Haven by an overwhelming number of British troops. That tradition continued through the Civil War, when 25 Yale graduates served as Generals in the Union army. Almost 9,500 Yale graduates served in World War I, including the men of the Yale Flying Unit, the first Naval Reserve Air unit. Lieutenant David Ingalls, a member of that unit, was the Navy’s first Ace. The Yale Flying Unit produced a Director of the Civil Aeronautics Board, a Commandant of the Army Air Corps, a Commandant of the Navy Air Corps, an Assistant Secretary of War, an Undersecretary of the Navy, and a Secretary of Defense.
The re-establishment of a Naval ROTC unit at Yale will open a new chapter in this proud tradition. For those Yale students interested in serving the country, ROTC will again become an attractive option, because students will no longer need to travel out of state to attend classes. Naval ROTC will also become a viable option for students from other colleges and universities in Connecticut, as it will be our intention to welcome them to take ROTC instruction at Yale under cross-enrollment arrangements.
I offer profound thanks to Secretary Mabus, Assistant Secretary Garcia, and their colleagues for their creativity in finding a way to bring Naval ROTC back to Yale. Like all agencies of the federal government, the Navy is under pressure to contain spending, including expenditures for training of new officers. Opening and sustaining an ROTC unit is expensive, and the number of cadets completing ROTC already exceeds the number of new Officers who are commissioned each year. From a purely quantitative perspective, the Navy has no need to open new detachments.
For that reason I applaud the Secretary and his colleagues for recognizing that re-establishing Naval ROTC at Yale is not strictly about numbers. It is about tapping a deep pool of talent at Yale to find officers who will make distinctive contributions to the Navy and the country. The return of Naval ROTC will make it easier for exceptionally talented young men and women who aspire to leadership in our military to gain a Yale education.
I am grateful to the Navy for giving Yale the opportunity to serve the nation in a partnership that I expect to be long and fruitful.
It is now my distinct pleasure to introduce Secretary Ray Mabus.
 