 In a letter to faculty colleagues issued today, Yale-NUS College President Pericles Lewis has clarified the policies of Yale-NUS College regarding freedom of expression, which have been incompletely or incorrectly represented in some recent press accounts.
Yale entered its partnership with the National University of Singapore in full awareness that national laws concerning freedom of expression would place constraints on the civic and political behavior of students and faculty. We negotiated language protecting academic freedom and open inquiry on the Yale-NUS campus, as well as the freedom to publish the results of scholarly inquiry in the academic literature. But we indicated in the Prospectus circulated in September 2010 that freedom of assembly was constrained in Singapore, and that students and faculty would have to observe national laws, as do students and faculty in Yale programs from London to Beijing. These subjects were discussed at the Yale College faculty meetings in March and April of this year. We understand the concerns of those who supported a faculty resolution and we intend to be open and accountable.
We undertook this partnership to advance in Asia both the development of liberal arts curriculum and pedagogy encouraging critical inquiry. These in themselves are objectives worthy of a great American institution of higher learning.  Singapore is a hub with connections throughout South, Southeast, and East Asia – an appropriate location for an institution designed as an example for these regions. We should not expect that our presence in Singapore would instantly transform the nation’s policies or culture. Instead, we have worked in fruitful partnership with colleagues at the National University of Singapore to design what is a thoroughly imaginative and exciting new college. The result will speak for itself.
We have approached our engagement in Singapore in the spirit that has characterized Yale’s many other engagements around the globe: that we have much to learn. Social norms, practices, and values differ widely across nations and cultures.  We (our students and faculty) seek to embrace these differences and seek to understand them, as the first step toward building the cross-cultural understanding that must be the foundation of global citizenship and cooperation in the face of the great challenges confronting our planet.  We believe that engagement with difference, and the education that inevitably flows from it, is a far more effective instrument for advancing the human spirit than either isolation or insistence that ours is the only true way.
 