Dear Members of the Yale Community,
On Tuesday, the killing of eight people—six of whom were Asian women—focused our attention on the increased violence, harassment, and discrimination that historically marginalized groups suffer across our nation. Once again, unthinkable violence has destroyed families and brought fear to communities already burdened with the effects of xenophobia and other injustices.
On the same day of that tragedy, Stop AAPI Hate announced that it has received nearly 3,800 reports of hate incidents against Asian Americans in the past year. Women reported over twice as many incidents as men. These events affect our colleagues, students, alumni, friends, and families within the Asian, Asian-American, and Pacific Islander communities.
In moments like this, it is more important than ever that we find strength in our shared purpose and take action to create a more just and equitable world.
At Yale, we do this through research and education and also by serving our local and surrounding communities. Faculty, students, and staff are helping immigrants and refugees find economic stability and supporting shelters and food pantries for vulnerable families. Faculty and students are conducting research on racism in society and its effects. Campus organizations—like the Asian Network at Yale and the Asian American Cultural Center—empower us to use our individual expertise and collective intellectual capacity to make a positive difference and support one another.
Recent tragedies as well as the ongoing pandemic help us see more clearly than before that we have a long road ahead of us to address deep-rooted challenges in our society. However, we also know that our efforts are vital. Our work, including the programs we have launched through the Belonging at Yale initiative, ensure that we can bring together our diverse strengths to create solutions and improve the world.
To members of our community who feel vulnerable right now: know that Yale is standing with you. I encourage everyone to reach out for support if needed.
Whether through our research, studies, or service, we can build on our different backgrounds, perspectives, and talents to help heal the fractures in our society. In facing the grim news of this week, I find strength in the work we are doing together to create a world of peace and justice for all.
With best wishes,
